





Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty-sixth meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR, 22 to 26 October 2007






Report of the CEP Observer to the twenty-sixth meeting of the Scientific Committee to CCAMLR, 22 to 26 October 2007
Introduction
At CEP IX, the Committee requested that the report of the CEP Observer to the meeting of CCAMLR’s Scientific Committee should be presented as a Working Paper to ensure more detailed consideration by the CEP of areas of joint interest.  The Committee also requested that the report should identify delegates responsible for the working groups of SC-CAMLR and references to electronic versions of the final reports from CCAMLR meetings (para 191 of the Final Report of CEP IX refers).  This report fulfils those requirements.
CCAMLR Overview
The principal decision-making body is the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).  The Commission has two standing committees: The Standing Committee on Administration and Finance (SCAF) and the Standing Committee on Implementation and Compliance (SCIC).  Like the ATCM, all decisions on matters of substance are taken by consensus.

The institutional features of the Convention comprise, in addition to the Commission, a Scientific Committee for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources and a permanent Secretariat, based in Hobart, Australia. The Scientific Committee (SC-CAMLR) has three permanent working groups:

    • Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM):
    • Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) and
    • Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM). 

In addition an ad hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fisheries (WG-IMAF) carries its activities as part of WG-FSA, and an Advisory Subgroup on Protected Areas carries its duties as part of WG-EMM.  From time to time, the Scientific Committee also establishes subgroups to deal with ad hoc tasks.

CCAMLR officers are as follows:

    • Commission Chair - Mr Peter Amutenya (Namibia)
    • SCIC Chair - Mr Valeria Carvajal (Chile)
    • SCAF Chair - Dr Hermann Pott (Germany)
    • Scientific Committee Chair - Dr Edith Fanta (Brazil)
    • WG-EMM Convener - Dr George Watters (USA)
    • WG-FSA Convener – Dr Chris Jones (USA 
    • WG-SAM Convener –Dr Andrew Constable (Australia)
    • WG-IMAF Co-Conveners - Ms Kim Rivera (USA) and Mr Neville Smith (New Zealand)

A map of the CCAMLR convention area is provided at Appendix 1.
More detailed information on CCAMLR and its various institutional bodies can be found at www.ccamlr.org


CEP Observer’s Report
The Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) Chair, Dr Neil Gilbert (New Zealand), was the CEP observer at the twenty-fifth meeting of the Scientific Committee to Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (SC-CCAMLR) held from 22 to 26 October 2007.
The Scientific Committee was chaired by Dr Edith Fanta from Brazil and was attended by all CCAMLR Members.  Contracting Parties to the CAMLR Convention were invited to attend and the Netherlands and the Cook Islands were represented.  As part of CCAMLR’s ongoing relationship-building efforts, a number of non-Contracting Parties with interests in fishing in the Convention Area or trade in toothfish were invited to attend and Cambodia and Mozambique did so.  Observers from ACAP, ASOC, CEP, COLTO, FFA, IUCN, IWC, SCAR and SEAFO also attended.
This report highlights issues that may be of particular interest to the CEP including, where applicable, the response of the CAMLR Commission to the recommendations of the Scientific Committee.  The full report of the Scientific Committee meeting will shortly be publicly available on the CCAMLR Secretariat website at www.ccamlr.org/pu/e/e_pubs/sr/drt.htm.
Intersessional meetings of SC-CCAMLR
    • The Working Group on Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM) met from 17 to 26 July 2006 in Christchurch, New Zealand.  
    • The Working Group on Fish Stock Assessment (WG-FSA) met in Hobart prior to the Scientific Committee meeting, from 8 to 19 October 2007.
    • The Working Group on Stock Assessment Methods (WG-SAM) was held in Christchurch, New Zealand, from 9 to 13 July 2007.
    • An ad-hoc Working Group on Incidental Mortality Associated with Fishing (WG-IMAF) was conducted as part of the WG-FSA meeting.
    • The second meeting of Sub Group – Approaches to Stock Assessment and Modelling (SG-ASAM) met in Cambridge, UK from 30 April to 2 May 2007. 
Issues arising
CCAMLR Review
Whilst not stemming directly from the meeting of the Scientific Committee, the CEP’s attention is drawn to the CCAMLR Commission’s decision at CCAMLR XXVI, to undertake a performance review of the organisation (CEP Circular 8 / CEP XI refers).  The Commission decision and the accompanying criteria for the review are provided in Appendix 2.  The CEP’s attention is drawn to the fact that the CEP Chair is listed as one of nine Members of the Review Panel.  The Review Panel meeting will take place 23-27 June 2008 at the CCAMLR Headquarters in Hobart.
    • The CEP is invited to comment on this issue, and to provide guidance to the CEP Chair in contributing to the CCAMLR performance review.
CEP / SC-CAMLR interaction
In receiving the report of CEP X, Members of the Scientific Committee noted once again several areas of common interest between the CEP and the Scientific Committee.  It was suggested that the Scientific Committee give consideration to holding a joint CEP / SC-CAMLR workshop in 2009, and that representatives from WG-EMM in particular be encouraged to attend.
This represents a positive indication of the Scientific Committee’s interest in developing closer ties with the CEP.
    • To assist SC-CAMLR’s further consideration of this proposal, it is suggested that the Committee identifies key agenda items for such a workshop, and possible timing.
Ecosystem Monitoring and Management (WG-EMM)
Management of protected areas
The Scientific Committee agreed that the management plan for the CCAMLR Ecosystem Monitoring Programme (CEMP) site at Cape Shirreff would not need to be reviewed until 2009.  The Scientific Committee also agreed that the Seal Islands CEMP site should be discontinued since research was no longer being undertaken at this site.
The Scientific Committee received advice from WG-EMM regarding the proposed management plan submitted by the USA for a new ASMA at Southwest Anvers Island and Palmer Basin.  The Scientific Committee agreed that the marine component contains a very small fraction of the krill population distributed throughout CCAMLR statistical subarea 48.1, and that the marine component of the ASMA is only 0.5% of the total surface area of subarea 48.1.  The Committee also agreed that the ASMA includes an important research area for considering krill interactions, which contributes to the work of CCAMLR.
The Scientific Committee suggested that text could be inserted into the management plan to state that fishing activities are permitted within the ASMA, though only in accordance with the provisions of the management plan and in coordination with other research activities taking place in the area, and that this could include the development of a research plan for fishing in this area.
In lending its support for the management plan the Scientific Committee agreed that its input on this issue had provided a valuable example of the important co-operation between CCAMLR and the CEP under the Antarctic Treaty System.
Marine protected areas
Dr Grant (UK) presented the report of the Workshop on Bioregionalisation of the Southern Ocean (13-17 August 2007).  The workshop report was posted on the CEP Discussion Forum in each of the Treaty languages on 20 December 2007.
The Scientific Committee endorsed the outcomes to the Workshop as well as the Workshop recommendations for further work including:
    • The primary regionalisation for the pelagic environment can be regarded as useful for application by CCAMLR and CEP, though the regionalisation for the benthic environment should be reviewed and optimised;
    • Refinements to this bioregionalisation could be made as methods and data are improved, and further fine-scale bioregionalisation of some areas could be undertaken on the basis of existing data;
    • The inclusion of process and species information could be considered in the context of systematic conservation planning and in developing a spatial decision-making framework.
The Scientific Committee agreed that this further work should be undertaken within the context of WG-EMM.
Krill-centric ecosystem
The Scientific Committee endorsed the importance of data collection to support CEMP indices and their analysis, encouraged regional studies in areas such as the Ross Sea and the Scotia Sea, and stressed the importance of long time series of krill density and recruitment indices.
The Scientific Committee also urged the Commission to encourage Members to develop (and maintain) long-term scientific monitoring programs studying the krill-based ecosystem to assist investigations of the effects of climate change as well as the effects of the fishery.

Fisheries (WG-FSA)
Fish resources
Fishing took place in 13 fisheries in 2006/07 taregting icefish (Champsocephalus gunnari), toothfish (Dissostichus eleginoides and D. mawsoni) and krill (Euphausia superba).  Other fisheries for D. eleginoides occurred in the EEZs of South Africa (Subareas 58.6 and 58.7) and France (Subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1).  The reported catches in the various fisheries are shown in Table 1, below.

Table 1 - Summary of reported catches for key target species during the 2006/07 fishing season
Target Species
Region
Fishery
Reported Catch
Catch limit
Champsocephalus gunnari
(icefish)
48.3
Trawl
3940
4337

58.5.2
Trawl
1
42
Dissostichus eleginoides
(toothfish)
48.3
Longline, pot
3535
3554

48.4
Longline
54
100

58.5.1 French EEZ
Longline, trawl
3438
ns

58.5.2
Longline trawl
1956
2427

58.6 French EEZ
Longline
333
ns

58 South African EEZ
Longline
126
ns
Dissostichus spp.
48.6
Exploratory longline
113
910

58.4.1
Exploratory longline
645
600

58.4.2
Exploratory longline
124
780

58.4.3a
Exploratory longline
4
250

58.4.3b
Exploratory longline
253
300

88.1
Exploratory longline
3096
3072

88.2
Exploratory longline
347
567
Euphausia superba
(krill)
48
Trawl
104364
4000000





ns – not specified by CCAMLR





Toothfish
A total of 14,024 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. had been reported as being taken in the Convention Area during the 2006/07 season, compared with 13,704 tonnes in the previous season.  Data reported in CCAMLR’s catch documentation scheme indicated that 9,084 tonnes of Dissostichus spp. were taken outside the Convention Area in 2006/07, compared with 8,048 tonnes in the previous season.
Icefish
The total reported catch limit of mackerel icefish (C. gunnari) for the 2006/07 season was 3,941 tonnes, compared with 2,434 tonnes taken the previous season.
Krill resources
A total catch of 104,364 tonnes of krill in the 2006/07 season was reported at the time of the Scientific Committee meeting, all in CCAMLR Area 48.  In comparison, the total catch for 2005/06 was 105,084 tonnes.  Nine Contracting Parties announced in advance their intention to fish for krill in the 2007/08 season, with a total (notified) catch of 764,000 tonnes – a record high level.
In advising the Commission on the increased interest being shown in the krill fishery, the Scientific Committee noted:
    • The increased interest in krill fishing appears genuine and it is likely that the krill catch will increase considerably over the next year;
    • There needs to be an orderly development of the krill fishery and failure in this would undermine CCAMLR;
    • There is a scientific need for systematic observer coverage in the krill fishery;
    • There should be an enhanced submission of information on a number of aspects of the krill fishery, including catch rates and effort measures; net sizes and meshes, and information on the processing capacity of the vessels.
New and exploratory fisheries 
In 2006/07, fishing occurred in seven exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp.  For 2007/08, 12 Members submitted paid notifications for exploratory longline fisheries for Dissostichus spp.
In advising the Commission, the Scientific Committee agreed that there remains an urgent need to develop assessments for all exploratory fisheries and to ensure appropriate data were collected to support such assessments.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing in the Convention Area
The total estimated IUU catch of Dissostichus spp. in the Convention Area during the 2006/07 season was 3,615 tonnes, a slight increase over the estimated figure for 2006/07 (3,420 tonnes), with most of this taken in Division 58.4.3b (2,293 tonnes).
IUU fishing peaked in the mid-1990’s in areas which are now well patrolled.  Routine surveillance in the sub-Antarctic Indian Ocean has led to a gradual reduction in IUU fishing, from an estimated total of 32,673 tonnes of toothfish taken in 1996/97 to a minimum of 2,178 in 2003/04.
IUU fishing has now moved to high-latitude regions of the Indian Ocean (subarea 58.4) and has increased in intensity.  The estimated IUU catch in Division 58.4.3b was 7.6 times greater than the precautionary catch limit for the exploratory long-line fishery in that division, which is considered unsustainable.
Bottom trawl fishing and destructive fishing practices within the CCAMLR Convention Area
The Commission had requested the Scientific Committee to review the criteria for determining what constitutes significant harm to benthos and benthic communities in the Convention Area.  
In the intersessional period the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) agreed the Sustainable Fisheries Resolution (61/105) calling upon States and fisheries organisations to take immediate action to ensure fish stocks are managed sustainably and to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems (VMEs).  UNGA Resolution 61/105 also calls upon States and fisheries organisations to regulate and manage all bottom fisheries in high-seas areas so as to prevent significant adverse impact on VMEs by no later than 31 December 2008.
To support the Scientific Committee’s consideration of this issue, WG-FSA provided considerable advice on processes that could be used to help specify operational requirements of fishers and the research and data collection requirements necessary to meet the obligations of the UN Resolution.  WG-FSA had given consideration to, inter alia: definition of key terms, the history of bottom trawling in CCAMLR high-seas areas, and an overall procedure for managing the interaction of bottom fishing with the benthic environment.
The Scientific Committee endorsed the work of WG-FSA and identified further work including:
    • Development of rules and data collection requirements;
    • Methods for specifying areas in which evidence of VMEs is detected (to allow for, for example, within season protection);
    • An approach for annual assessments of benthic interactions of bottom fishing and identification of vulnerable and potentially vulnerable areas;
    • Requirements for observation and reporting;
    • Management approaches to avoiding and mitigating impacts on VMEs;
    • Consideration of the relationship between the effective fishing footprint and geomorphological features;
    • Methods for assessing areas of seabed affected by fishing gears including the use of cameras.
The Scientific Committee noted that the overall procedure for managing benthic interactions, developed by WG-FSA, makes it easier to understand what needs to be done and when, and how this work contributes to CCAMLR achieving its objectives and complying with the UNGA Resolution.
Incidental mortality associated with fishing (WG-IMAF)
Marine mammals
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2006/07:
    • There were three reports of marine mammal mortalities in long-line fisheries, compared to no reported catches in the 2005/06 season;
    • No marine mammals were reported entangled or killed in the krill trawl fishery, compared to 95 caught during krill fishing in 2004/05 and one in 2005/06;
    • No marine mammals were reported entangled or killed in the finfish trawl fishery, compared to one that was caught in the toothfish trawl fishery in 2005/06.
The Scientific Committee noted the positive result for 2006/07, but emphasised the need for continued monitoring and vigilance of incidental mortality in all fisheries.
Seabirds
The Scientific Committee noted that in the Convention Area in 2006/07:
    • No seabird mortalities were observed in all longline fisheries in the Convention Area (with the exception of the French EEZ in subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1) compared to 2 birds estimated killed in long-line fisheries in 2005/06;
    • When seabird mortalities from subarea 58.6 and Division 58.5.1 EEZs are included, the total extrapolated seabird mortalities during longline fishing operations were estimated to be 2,257 (compared to 2,589 the previous season).
    • For the second consecutive year, no albatrosses were observed captured in longline fisheries in the Convention Area.
    • Six seabirds (including albatrosses and petrels) were killed in the trawl icefish fishery in subarea 48.3, compared to 33 the year before.
The Scientific Committee noted the ongoing efforts to reduce seabird mortality in the French EEZ fisheries and that efforts were resulting in a reduction of seabird by-catch by about one half each year since 2001-2002.  However, the Scientific Committee also noted that the seabird captures during long-line fishing in the French EEZs are the only remaining substantial seabird by-catch in the Convention Area
France also indicated that it was not satisfied with the results and noted its intention to pursue additional measures through an action plan that it will implement.  The action plan’s objective is to reduce the current level of incidental mortality by a factor of two over the next three years.  France will submit a report annually to the ad hoc WG-IMAF.  The Scientific Committee was encouraged by France’s action plan and its agreement to submit the full suite of data in the CCAMLR format.
Seabird by-catch and IUU fishing
The Scientific Committee estimated that potential seabird by-catch as a result of IUU fishing for the whole of the Convention Area was 8,212 birds compared to an estimated 4,583 birds the previous season.  The Scientific Committee emphasised that these are very approximate estimates, and reiterated its advice that these levels are of substantial concern and are probably unsustainable for some populations.
Seabird by-catch outside the Convention Area
The Scientific Committee noted a verbal report to ad hoc WG-IMAF on new information about documented high levels of mortality of Convention Area seabirds in pelagic longline fisheries in southern African waters.  When coupled with the levels of mortality reported in 2006 for South African deep-water hake trawl fishery, it is of great concern that many thousands of albatrosses are estimated to be killed annually in these fisheries, including about 5,000 black browed albatrosses thought to predominantly be from the population breeding at South Georgia.
The Scientific Committee reminded Members of the importance of reporting on seabird mortality of Convention Area birds caught outside the Convention Area.
The Scientific Committee also considered international and national initiatives related to incidental mortality of seabirds in relation to long-line fishing.  The Scientific Committee took note of initiatives underway in ACAP, FAO and other RFMOs.  The Scientific Committee encouraged Members to use and promote ACAP resources; reiterated its support for the development of FAO best-practice guidelines, and recommended that the Commission extend an offer of technical assistance and/or information sharing with other relevant RFMOs.
The Scientific Committee also endorsed ad hoc WG-IMAFs recommendation that its annual meetings continue.
Marine Mammal and Bird Populations
The Scientific Committee noted WG-EMMs progress towards a workshop on the estimation of land-based marine predator abundance in the southwest Atlantic, and agreed that the workshop would be held at the CCAMLR headquarters in Hobart, 16-20 June 2008.
The terms of reference for the workshop are to:
    • Consider candidate procedures for deriving abundance estimates for priority land-based predator species in the southwest Atlantic region between 70o W and 30o W;
    • Identify the minimum data requirements to satisfy the preferred candidate procedures;
    • Examine available existing datasets to determine the degree to which the minimum requirements are met, and identify inadequacies or gaps in existing data;
    • Where feasible apply preferred candidate procedures to existing data to derive abundance estimates;
    • Identify and prioritise gaps in existing data as a basis for assessing where and how future survey work would be conducted;
    • Develop a plan for work beyond the workshop including the use of diet and energetic data to convert estimates of abundance to consumption.
To facilitate ongoing work on this issue the Scientific Committee agreed to establish a WG-EMM subgroup on Status and Trend Assessment for Predator Populations (WG-EMM-STAPP).

Marine Debris
The Scientific Committee noted several papers regarding marine debris surveys.  The Scientific Committee agreed that this item would be better delegated to ad hoc WG-IMAF for its expert consideration and recommended that the issue of marine debris be removed from the Scientific Committee’s agenda.
 
A CEP Observer has been invited to participate in the next Scientific Committee meeting in October 2008 (SC-CCAMLR-XXVII).




Appendix 1



Figure 1 - Map of the CCAMLR Convention Area








Appendix 2

CCAMLR Decision to undertake a Performance Review 
of the Organisation
The Commission for the Conservation of the Antarctic Living Marine Resources (CCAMLR),
Recalling Article II of the CAMLR Convention which states that the objective of the Convention is the conservation of the Antarctic marine living resources and that, for the purpose of the Convention, the term ‘conservation’ includes rational use,
Also recalling Article V of the CAMLR Convention, which highlights the special obligations and responsibilities of Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties for the protection and preservation of the environment of the Antarctic Treaty Area,
Further recalling that any harvesting and associated activities in the CAMLR Convention Area are to be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Convention and with principles of conservation as set forth in the Convention,
Noting the discussions held at the CCAMLR Symposium in Valdivia, Chile, from 5 to 8 April 2005,
Considering the recent calls of the international community to organisations with management and conservation responsibilities with respect to fisheries and marine living resources to strengthen their efforts to attain their objectives and to implement adequate approaches to fisheries management,
Further considering the 2006 UN General Assembly Resolution 61/105 calling for Regional Fisheries Management Organisations and arrangements with management and conservation responsibilities on fisheries and marine living resources, to undertake urgently a Performance Review,
Deciding that it would be appropriate to undertake for itself such a Performance Review,
decides, in accordance with Article IX, paragraph 1:
1.	That a Performance Review of CCAMLR shall be conducted during the 2007/08 intersessional period and a final report shall be submitted to the Contracting Parties at the 2008 annual meeting.
2.	The Review shall be carried out on the basis of the attached list of criteria. 
	The Review Panel may consider adding criteria, if needed.  The Panel may take into consideration the discussions held at the Valdivia Symposium referred to above.
3.	The Review Panel will be composed of nine persons, as follows:
(i)	four internationally recognised persons who have experience in the CCAMLR context and a thorough understanding of the CAMLR Convention, and who shall reflect the composition of the Members of CCAMLR;
(ii)	the Chair of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP); 
(iii)	an expert from a CCAMLR non-governmental organisation (NGO) observer;
(iv)	three external experts, among whom there is experience in relevant areas of science, fisheries management and legal matters (including compliance and enforcement issues).
	The Review Panel shall be appointed by the Commission. 
	The external experts shall be internationally recognised in their field, but shall have no involvement or direct experience with CCAMLR.
	The Panel members shall be independent and participate in their personal capacity.
	The Review Panel Chair shall be a Panel member selected by the Panel.
4.	CCAMLR Members may provide in writing two names, each accompanied by a one-paragraph curriculum vitae (CV), for each category ((i) internal members, (ii) external expert in science, (iii) external expert in fisheries management, (iv) external expert in legal matters related to international law) to the Chair of the Commission, through the Secretariat, by 31 December 2007.
	The Chair of the Commission shall provide to Members, by 15 January 2008, four lists, containing the names proposed by the Members for the appointment of: 
(i)	the four persons who have experience in the CCAMLR context; and 
(ii)	the three external experts to the Review Panel. 
	The Members shall immediately acknowledge receipt of the communication.  Members may respond in writing to the Chair of the Commission within 30 days indicating preferences for two persons from each list. 
	The Chair of the Commission, at the end of the 30-day period shall, through the Secretariat, inform Members of the names of the persons for whom preference has been expressed through the selection process described above.
	Once these persons have been identified, the Secretariat shall write to each person selected by the Members for appointment to the Review Panel, indicating CCAMLR’s desire to appoint him or her and seeking their positive response.
5.	The NGO expert will be recommended to the Commission by the NGOs accredited as official observers to CCAMLR by 31 December 2007.  The name of the NGO expert selected will be communicated to the Chair of the Commission through the Secretariat. 
	The Chair of the Commission will provide the name of the NGO expert to the Members of the Commission together with the four lists of candidates mentioned above.
6.	The Review Panel will meet at the CCAMLR Headquarters during May/June 2008.
7.	The CCAMLR Secretariat shall provide logistical support and information to the Review Panel and shall not form part of this Panel.
8.	The Review Panel shall decide by consensus.  In the event consensus cannot be reached, individual members of the Panel may include their views in the Panel’s report.
9.	Travel and accommodation costs for the participants in the Review Panel meeting shall be borne by the CCAMLR budget, except for the NGO representative. 
10.	The report and the conclusions (including recommendations) of the Performance Review shall be communicated by the Panel Chair to CCAMLR Members, the Chair of the Commission and the Executive Secretary 45 days in advance of the 2008 annual meeting at which they will be considered firstly by SCIC, SCAF and the Scientific Committee and then by the Commission for discussion and action, if needed. 
	SCIC, SCAF and the Scientific Committee shall report to the Commission the results of their discussions on this issue.
	The Report and the conclusions shall also be distributed to Contracting Parties and observers at the 2008 annual meeting, and shall be placed on the CCAMLR website.
11.	Following the first review, subsequent reviews may be conducted if deemed appropriate by the Commission.
Criteria for Reviewing the Performance of CCAMLR
Area
General criteria
Detailed criteria
1.	Role of CCAMLR within the Antarctic Treaty System
Relationship with the Antarctic Treaty System
•	Extent to which CCAMLR effectively implements its obligations under Articles III and V of the Convention.




Environmental protection
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has effectively observed measures, resolutions and decisions of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative meetings related to the protection of Antarctic marine living resources.




Conservation
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has taken into account the effects of harvesting, research, conservation and associated activities on the marine ecosystem, the known or potential effects of environmental changes in its management of Antarctic marine living resources, and the risks and effects of the introduction of alien species.




Protected areas
•	Effectiveness of CCAMLR’s relationship with the ATCM in considering proposals for ASPAs and ASMAs with marine components and providing advice to the ATCM.
•	What management and administrative tools are available to build up a system of protected areas.
•	Extent to which ccamlr has made progress to respond to the WSSD target to establish a representative network of marine protected areas by 2012.




Marine pollution
•	Effectiveness of CCAMLR to implement measures to provide for protection of the Southern Ocean and Antarctic environment from the impacts of vessels engaged in harvesting, research, conservation and associated activities, including measures relating to marine pollution and vessel safety.



2.	Conservation
and management
Status of living
marine resources
•	Status of Antarctic marine living resources under the purview of CCAMLR.
•	Trends in the status of those resources.
•	Status of species that belong to the same ecosystems as, or are associated with or dependent upon, targeted Antarctic marine living resources.
•	Trends in the status of those species.




Ecosystem approach
•	Extent to which CCAMLR decisions take account of and incorporate an ecosystem approach to management.




Data collection 
and sharing
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has agreed formats, specifications and timeframes for data submissions.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR Members and Contracting Parties, individually or through CCAMLR, collect and share complete and accurate data concerning Antarctic marine living resources and other relevant data in a timely manner.
•	Extent to which fishing and research data and fishing vessel and research vessel data are gathered by CCAMLR and shared among Members.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR is addressing any gaps in the collection and sharing of data as required.










2.	Conservation
and management (continued)
Quality and provision of scientific advice
•	Extent to which CCAMLR receives and acts on the basis of the best scientific advice relevant to the Antarctic marine living resources under its purview, as well as to the effects of harvesting, research, conservation and associated activities, on the marine ecosystem.




Adoption of conservation and management measures
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has adopted conservation and management measures for Antarctic marine living resources that ensure the conservation, including rational use, of those resources and are based on the best scientific evidence available.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has applied a precautionary approach as set forth in the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Article 7.5, including the application of precautionary reference points.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR is applying uniform principles and procedures to all species in the Antarctic ecosystem.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has moved toward the adoption of conservation and management measures for previously unregulated fisheries, including new and exploratory fisheries.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has taken due account of the need to conserve marine biological diversity and minimise harmful impacts of harvesting, research, conservation and associated activities on marine living resources and marine ecosystems.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has adopted measures to minimise pollution, waste, discards, catch by lost or abandoned gear, catch of non-target Antarctic marine living resources, and impacts on associated or dependent species through measures including, to the extent practicable, the development and use of selective, environmentally safe and cost-effective fishing gear and techniques.




Capacity management
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has identified fishing capacity levels commensurate with the conservation, including rational use, of Antarctic marine living resources.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has taken actions to prevent or eliminate excess fishing capacity and effort.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR monitors the levels of fishing effort, including taking into account annual notifications for participation by Contracting Parties.



3.	Compliance and enforcement
Flag State duties
•	Extent to which CCAMLR Members are fulfilling their duties as Flag States under the treaty establishing CCAMLR, pursuant to measures adopted by CCAMLR, and under other international instruments, including, inter alia, the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention and the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement, as applicable.




Port State 
measures
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has adopted measures relating to the exercise of the rights and duties of its Members and Contracting Parties as Port States, as reflected in the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Article 8.3.
•	Extent to which these measures are effectively implemented.




Monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS)
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has adopted integrated MCS measures (e.g. required use of VMS, observers, catch documentation and trade tracking schemes, restrictions on transhipment, boarding and inspection schemes).
•	Extent to which these measures are effectively implemented.




3.	Compliance and enforcement
(continued)
Follow-up on infringements
•	Extent to which CCAMLR, its Members and Contracting Parties follow up on infringements to management measures.




Cooperative mechanisms to detect and deter non-compliance
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has established adequate cooperative mechanisms to both monitor compliance and detect and deter non-compliance (e.g. compliance committees, vessel lists, sharing of information about non-compliance).
•	Extent to which these mechanisms are being effectively utilised.




Market-related measures
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has adopted measures relating to the exercise of the rights and duties of its Members and Contracting Parties as Market States for Antarctic marine living resources.



4.	Decision-making and dispute settlement
Decision-making
•	Efficiency of Commission meetings and working groups in addressing critical issues in a timely and effective manner.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has transparent and consistent decision-making procedures that facilitate the adoption of conservation measures in a timely and effective manner.
•	Existence of an informal mechanism of cooperation between Members based on reciprocities.




Dispute settlement
•	Extent to which CCAMLR has established adequate mechanisms for resolving disputes.



5.	International cooperation
Transparency
•	Extent to which CCAMLR is operating in a transparent manner, taking into account the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Article 7.1.9.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR decisions, meeting reports, scientific advice upon which decisions are made, and other relevant materials are made publicly available in a timely fashion. 




Relationship to non-Contracting Parties cooperating with various CCAMLR measures
•	Extent to which CCAMLR facilitates cooperation between Members and non-Members, including through encouraging non-Contracting Parties to become Contracting Parties and Members of the Commission or to implement voluntarily CCAMLR conservation measures.




Relationship to non-cooperating non-Contracting Parties
•	Extent to which CCAMLR provides for action in accordance with international law against non-Contracting Parties undermining the objective of the Convention, as well as measures to deter such activities, as well as encouraging them to become Contracting Parties and Members of the Commission or to implement voluntarily CCAMLR conservation measures.




Cooperation with other international organisations
•	Extent to which CCAMLR cooperates with other international organisations.




Special requirements of Developing States
•	Extent to which CCAMLR recognises the special needs of Developing States and pursues forms of cooperation with Developing States, taking into account the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries Article 5.
•	Extent to which CCAMLR Members, individually or through the Commission, provide relevant assistance to Developing States.



6.	Financial and administrative issues
Availability of resources for  activities
•	Extent to which financial and other resources are made available to achieve the aims of ccamlr and to implement ccamlr’s decisions.







6.	Financial and administrative issue (continued)
Efficiency and cost-effectiveness
•	Extent to which ccamlr is efficiently and effectively managing its human and financial resources, including those of the Secretariat.
•	Extent to which the schedule and organisation of the meetings could be improved.




