





Report of the Intersessional Open-ended Contact Group to Consider the Draft CEE for the “Proposed Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Research Station at Dome A”



Report of the Intersessional Open-ended Contact Group to Consider the Draft CEE for the “Proposed Construction and Operation of the New Chinese Research Station at Dome A”
Working Paper submitted by Australia 
    1. Summary
An intersessional open-ended contact group (ICG) was established in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs to consider China’s draft comprehensive environmental evaluation (CEE) for “Proposed Construction and Operation of the new Chinese Dome A Station, Dome A, Antarctica”. The ICG determined the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Annex I of the Protocol on Environmental Protection. Participants raised a number of issues for the CEP’s attention, in particular the suggestion that the proponent should consider expanding the scope of the impact assessment to more adequately cover the proposed activities as described.
    2. Background
On 31 January 2008, in accordance with Annex I of the Protocol, China notified CEP contact points of the availability of the draft CEE for “Proposed Construction and Operation of the new Chinese Dome A Station, Dome A, Antarctica”. The notice explained the CEE had been prepared by the Chinese Arctic and Antarctic Administration (CAA) of the State Oceanic Administration of China (SOA) and approved and endorsed by the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs and SOA. It also advised of the location on the CAA website from which the draft CEE could be downloaded (http://www.chinare.ce.en/, “Publications” section), invited CEP Members to make comments and recommendations, and nominated China’s contact point. 
In accordance with the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs (Appendix 4 to the CEP X Final Report) the CEP Chair issued:
    • CEP Circular 4/CEP XI (1 February 2008), which advised of the availability of the draft CEE;
    • CEP Circular 5/CEP XI (5 February 2008), which:
    • advised of the need to establish an ICG to review the draft CEE;
    • proposed that Australia’s CEP representative, Mr Ewan McIvor of the Australian Antarctic Division, convene the ICG;
    • proposed terms of reference for the ICG; and
    • invited CEP Members to comment on the proposed convenor and/or terms of reference.
    • CEP Circular 6/CEP XI (20 February 2008), which noted that no comments had been received on the proposed convenor or terms of reference.
Terms of Reference
As no Member proposed consideration of additional matters, the ICG addressed the three standard terms of reference outlined  in the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs:
    1) The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
    2) Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
    3) The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Method of Operation
All ICG correspondence was available to CEP Members and Observers via the CEP Discussion Forum. The English language version of the full draft CEE was posted to the Discussion Forum, together English, French, Spanish and Russian versions of the Non-technical Summary and Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica (2005).
ICG participants were reminded by the CEP Chair and ICG convenor of the CEP’s agreement that the Procedures for intersessional consideration of Draft CEEs do not detract from the right of any Party to the Protocol to raise an issue on a draft CEE at meetings of the CEP or ATCM.
The ICG commenced with an initial comment period from 20 February to 4 April. The convenor circulated a draft report for comment on 7 April and prepared a final report, addressing comments received, by the deadline for submission of Working Papers to ATCM XXXI / CEP XI (18 April).
3. Summary of comments received from ICG participants
Comments were submitted to the ICG by ten CEP Members (Australia, Belgium, Ecuador, France, Germany, Japan, New Zealand, South Africa, United Kingdom, United States) and one Observer (ASOC). Those comments are summarised below, under the relevant terms of reference (each submission is available in full from the Discussion Forum).
Note: Page references in this report relate to the English language version of the full draft CEE document available for download as a PDF file from the Chinese National Antarctic Research Expeditions (CHINARE) website on 31 January 2008.
    1. The extent to which the CEE conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol.
The ICG determined that the draft CEE generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I of the Environmental Protocol. It was acknowledged that the proposed activity is a highly ambitious and technically and logistically challenging undertaking. Many participants congratulated the proponent for its plans to apply sound environmental principles in the construction, operation and decommissioning of the proposed Dome A station, including through the use of low impact materials and equipment, implementation of thorough waste minimisation and management practices, and use of renewable energy sources.
Participants identified a number of matters for which they considered further information or clarification should be provided in the final CEE. The following section describes the most significant issues raised by many ICG participants. A summary of other points for which one or more participants suggested clarification was required or desirable is given in Appendix A.
Scope of impacts analysis
Several participants commented that Section 5 Identification of Environmental Impacts and Preventative or Mitigating Measures should be expanded to more adequately address the range of proposed activities as described in Section 2 Description of the Proposed Activities. Reference was made to the Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment in Antarctica which note the importance of determining the full scope of the activity, so that impacts can be properly assessed. 
    • Consideration of year-round operations: The draft CEE states (in Section 2.4.1, and elsewhere) that the station will be operated as a summer-only station of 15-20 people for at least the first ten years, but the long-term intention is to operate with a year-round population of 25. Several participants noted that some important aspects of the impact assessment in Section 5, such as fuel usage figures, apply only to the (lower) level of activity in the initial summer-only phase. It was recommended that the final CEE should address the impacts of the planned level(s) of activity throughout the intended 25 year operational life of the station or, less preferably, should clearly explain how and at what level of EIA the transition to year-round operations will be separately assessed.
    • Associated scientific activities: Section 1.3 explains the station is intended to support a range of major, long-term research activities at Dome A and in the surrounding region, including glaciological observation and deep ice core drilling, geological drilling and sampling, and aircraft remote sensing of ice and snow. Many participants noted that the potentially significant impacts of these activities are not, however, assessed in the draft CEE – particular attention was drawn to potential impacts of deep ice core drilling and associated drilling fluids. It was recommended that the final CEE should incorporate an analysis of the impacts of these associated research activities, or should clearly explain how and at what level of EIA the impacts of those activities – including cumulative impacts – will be separately assessed. 
    • Larsemann Hills ASMA: Many participants noted the draft CEE (including Section 4.7 Protected Area, Historical Sites and Monuments) makes no reference to the existence of the Larsemann Hills Antarctic Specially Managed Area (ASMA) No. 6 and its management plan. It is clearly indicated that a range of activities will take place in the Larsemann Hills, with Zhongshan station to be the coastal staging point for the transfer of personnel, equipment, fuel and other supplies to and from the Dome A station. As the planned activities in the Larsemann Hills are an integral part of the proposed activity, and are additional to activities currently undertaken in the absence of Dome A station, they suggested the scope of the final CEE should be expanded to more adequately describe the activities that will take place in the Larsemann Hills and to identify likely impacts (including cumulative impacts) and mitigation measures. They also suggested the final CEE should describe how the activity will comply with the ASMA Management Plan, and drew particular attention to the need for further information on measures to prevent the introduction of non-native species to the Larsemann Hills and other sites further inland.
    • Aircraft: General reference is made in the draft CEE to the possible use of aircraft at Dome A (e.g. Section 2.2) including, specifically, to transport personnel and some cargo to the station (e.g. Sections 2.6.1, 3.3), and to conduct research activities in the surrounding region (e.g. Sections 1.3.3, 1.3.5). It is also planned to establish a relay site between Zhongshan and Dome A, in part to allow aircraft refuelling (Section 2.3.2). Participants noted the document does not address potential impacts arising from the impacts of aircraft use, and suggested the final CEE should clearly provide such details, including for the facilities (such as airstrips or fuel depots at Dome A and the relay site) that will be required.
Waste management
    • As indicated above, there was general support for the proposed waste management measures described in Section 2.8.1 and elsewhere. While noting that the proponent intends to prepare a comprehensive waste management plan, many participants suggested the final CEE should provide further details about planned waste management measures, including by:
    • clarifying whether human waste* from Dome A will be “brought out of Antarctica” (as indicated in Table 23) or returned to Zhongshan for treatment (as stated in Sections 2.5.5 and 2.8.1);
    • (if human waste is to be treated at Zhongshan) describing the expected quantity of such waste, the type of treatment to be applied, and whether any impacts on the Larsemann Hills environment are expected, particularly given the increased load on the Zhongshan waste treatment plant;
    • providing more information about where and how hazardous wastes will be stored at Dome A (Section 2.8.3), what types of wastes will be classified as “hazardous”, and what quantity of hazardous wastes will be produced (Tables 19 and 20 indicate one “small box” but dimensions are not given);
    • providing more information about the ice pits, including: where they will be located at Dome A; how much waste water they are expected to hold; what kind of measures will be taken to reduce impacts on the immediate environment of Dome A; and how they are expected to move with movement of the ice sheet; and
    • explaining how human excrement produced during the construction stage will be managed (identified in Section 8 as an uncertainty).
* It was noted that the discussion of human waste management arrangements would be clearer if consistent terminology was used throughout the document (the draft CEE variously refers to human excrement, human excretions, stool and urine, blackwater, faeces and night stool). 
Fuel handling and storage 
    • Several participants commented that it is not clear whether the 15m3 fuel tanks to be used to transport fuel by traverse from Zhongshan to Dome A (described in section 2.4.3) are the same fuel tanks that will be used at the station (described in section 2.5.3). They requested clarification of whether the traverse fuel tanks will be exchanged for station tanks upon arrival at Dome A, or whether fuel will be transferred from traverse tanks to station tanks. Clarification was also sought on whether the leak detection system described in Section 5.4.2 will apply to both traverse tanks and station tanks (if different). 
    2. Whether the conclusions of the draft CEE are adequately supported by the information contained within the document.
Noting that clarification of several aspects of the draft CEE was suggested, as reported above, it was generally agreed that a CEE was the appropriate level of assessment for the proposed activity as described. 
Several participants agreed with the proponent’s statement that the project is justifiable on the basis of its scientific significance, and with consideration of the environmental principles to be applied. 
A range of comments were made on the draft CEE’s conclusion that “[t]he construction and operation of the station may only have minor or transitory impacts on the Antarctic environment”. Many participants suggested the CEE might more appropriately conclude that the proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact. Of those participants:
    • some based their comments on the characteristics of proposed activity (e.g. suggesting that the intended 25 year operational period is more than transitory); 
    • some expressed the view that establishment of a new station in Antarctica cannot be considered as having only a minor or transitory impact on the environment; and
    • some expressed the view that a conclusion of more than minor or transitory impacts should be reached because the activity was assessed at the CEE level and, under Article 3 of Annex I, a CEE need only be prepared if an IEE indicates or if it is otherwise determined that a proposed activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact.
One participant encouraged the proponent to draw directly on the terminology of Annex I of the Protocol when stating the conclusion of the overall assessment.
    3. The clarity, format and presentation of the draft CEE.
Participants generally agreed that the draft CEE is clear and well-structured. They congratulated China for preparing a detailed comprehensive document, and for its considerable effort in translating the draft CEE from Chinese to English. A range of minor editorial points were identified for the proponent to consider when preparing the final CEE (see Appendix B). It was also suggested that the proponent might consider editing the document to consolidate the text and reduce repetition. 
Conclusions
Having reviewed China’s draft CEE for the “Proposed Construction and Operation of the new Chinese Dome A Station, Dome A, Antarctica” in accordance with the Procedures for intersessional CEP consideration of draft CEEs, the ICG advises the CEP that:
    1) The draft CEE and the process followed by China generally conforms to the requirements of Article 3 of Annex I to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. When preparing the required final CEE, the proponent should closely consider and address, as appropriate, the comments raised by participants and summarised above. In particular, the CEP’s attention is drawn to the suggestion that the proponent should consider expanding the scope of the impact assessment to more adequately cover the proposed activities as described.
    2) There was general agreement with the proponent’s conclusion that the proposed activity is justified on the basis of the significant contribution it is likely to make to the support and conduct of important science. However, many participants expressed the view that, for a range of reasons summarised above and on the basis of information provided in the draft CEE, it would be more appropriate to conclude that the activity is likely to have more than a minor or transitory impact on the Antarctic environment. 
    3) The draft CEE is clear and well-structured. The final CEE could be improved by taking into consideration participants’ editorial suggestions (identified in Appendix B) and by consolidating text to reduce repetition.
Appendix A. Other points for which one or more ICG participant suggested clarification was required or desirable
Non-technical Summary
    • The physical impacts of the station and traverse route are discussed in Section 5, and should also be included in the list of direct impacts given in the Non-technical Summary (page 11).
1. Introduction
    • It is stated in Section 1.1 and elsewhere (Sections 2.5.14, 5.11.2, 5.13 and 10) that there will be “no obvious remnants” when the station is decommissioned, but it is not clear whether the station foundation and supports will be removed or whether they will be buried under accumulated snow. Consideration should be given to whether a greater environmental impact will result from digging out these materials or leaving them in place.
    • The proponent’s stated intention to promote international cooperation and to open the station for use by scientists from other nations (Section 1.3) was praised. It was noted, however, that few details are given about how such cooperation will occur and for which projects. When determining the focus of the planned research activities, the proponent was encouraged to closely consider drawing on the specific characteristics of the Dome A site to build on rather than duplicate activities already underway at other inland stations.
2. Description of the Proposed Activities
    • It would be useful to provide further details in Section 2.4.3 regarding the relevant characteristics of the traverse vehicles and sledges and how they will be operated to transport personnel and cargo between Zhongshan and Dome A. It would be helpful to supplement the information in Section 2.5.8 to clarify whether the “one light snow vehicle, one caterpillar carrier and five snow motor vans” will be used for the traverse or will remain at Dome A.
    • It is stated in Section 2.4.3 and elsewhere that Aviation Turbine Kerosene (ATK) is a “clean” fuel. This description is somewhat misleading and, although ATK might be “relatively” clean in comparison to some other types of fuel, the tables in Sections 3.3 and 5.3.2 clearly indicate that a range of pollutant emissions will be produced. The final CEE could more appropriately describe the “relative cleanliness” of ATK as compared to alternative fuels.
    • It was noted that there is a relatively small proportion of the station facilities identified in Table 5 (Section 2.5.2) dedicated to scientific activities, and questioned whether the proponent has plans to extend the area available for scientific activities. In a similar manner, the final CEE could usefully specify the ratio of science to support personnel, as a measure of the station’s efficiency.
    • Further information on the station design and building materials should be provided in Section 2.5.2, including to clarify that no materials prohibited under Annex III will be used.
    • The daily water requirement of 37 litres per person per day, as described Section 2.5.5, seems low compared to the estimated daily water use per person at other stations, including inland stations. It was also questioned where the snow would be obtained to produce 440 litres of water per day, and what impact that will have on the immediate environment of the station.
    • It would be useful to provide further details on the process for oxygen generation (Section 2.5.4), including energy consumption, associated emissions and storage arrangements.
    • Section 2,5,6 does not describe  how power will be transferred to the station from the generator building and whether any impacts will arise from that equipment (e.g. through burial of cables).
    • Several aspects of the facilities and equipment described in Table 10 (Section 2.5.8) appear to be insufficient to cater for the planned number of station personnel during either the initial summer-only operation (15-20 persons) or the longer-term year-round operation (25 persons) (e.g. emergency accommodation cabin to house 15, life vests for 15, tents to house 16).
    • It is explained in Section 2.8 and elsewhere that solid wastes will be transported back to Zhongshan and repatriated to China. Further information was sought about how the proponent will ensure implementation of the planned waste practices, to avoid the long-term storage of Dome A wastes at Zhongshan.
3. Alternative to Proposed Activity
    • The emissions figures in Tables 11 and 12 (Section 3.3) are those provided in Germany’s final CEE for Neumayer III station, but the German figures related to ATK use in a Dornier Do 228 aircraft and are unlikely to provide an accurate estimation of use in a diesel power generator. 
4. Reference on the Primitive Environment in the Dome A Region
    • The description of initial environmental reference state in Section 4 does not describe what has already been cached or installed at the Dome A site and under which level of EIA these activities have been conducted.
    • Section 4 does not describe the movement of the ice sheet in the Dome A region (noted in Section 5.6.1 as “extremely slow”) or the possibility of overflying or visiting skua, which have been seen at other inland stations.
    • As mentioned above, the scope of the CEE – including the description of initial environmental reference state – may need to be expanded to also consider areas of operation in the Larsemann Hills.
5. Identification of the Environmental Impacts and Preventative or Mitigating Measures
    • The draft CEE states on page 81 that if the proposed activities are not conducted “the value of wildness in the area will not be affected”, however the impacts analysis in Section 5 does not discuss the likely impacts on wilderness values if the proposed construction and operation of the station does proceed.
    • It was questioned whether there will be an increase in current fuel consumption by the ship or Zhongshan station as a result of activities in support of Dome A (i.e. transport of extra cargo and/or accommodation of additional personnel). If so, this should be reflected in Table 13 (Section 5.3.1).
    • The use of bright colours for the station exterior, as depicted on the cover and in Figures elsewhere in the draft CEE, seems to conflict with the statement in Section 5.11 that the station will be designed to “minimise visual impact”. A clause could be added to explain that such colours will be used for safety and practical reasons.
    • It was noted that the impacts arising from the Zhongshan to Dome A traverse are discussed in Section 5 and could be included as a separate activity in the impact matrix (Section 5.13). Also, Section 5 and the impact matrix could describe impacts, other than on snow and ice, which might be expected to arise from traverses between Zhongshan and Dome A during both summer-only and year-round operations.
    • The significance evaluation for all impacts in Table 22 (Section 5.13) is low or very low, which seems inconsistent with the fact that a CEE has been prepared.
6. Indirect Impact and Cumulative Impact
    • It was suggested that the assessment of cumulative impacts could also address the building of another research station, with consideration of other developments taking place in Antarctica.
    • Also, the cumulative impacts possibly arising from the continual human presence and the discharge of treated water and atmospheric emissions from the station could be explored further. 
7. Environmental Monitoring Plan
    • The information provided on planned monitoring activities was welcomed, but the discussion of monitoring in Section 7 could usefully be expanded to include:
    • details of sampling frequency, spatial coverage and parameters (including, if necessary, monitoring of relevant characteristics in the Larsemann Hills and at Zhongshan);
    • details of the environmental baseline data mentioned in Sections 4.5 and 7;
    • monitoring of appropriate biotic parameters, including in the Larsemann Hills;
    • monitoring of snow and ice samples along the traverse route (Section 7.3); and
    • monitoring of oil spills at relevant areas other than near the station oil tanks, including the traverse route and other areas on station (Section 7.4).
    • It was suggested that the proponent should consider organising an independent audit of the completed station against the final CEE, as best practice environmental impact assessment at the CEE level.
8. Gaps in Knowledge and Uncertainties
    • It was noted that, at the present time, the quality of the Dome A site for astronomy and the feasibility of establishing an astronomical observatory still remain to be tested. This should be identified in the section on “Gaps in knowledge and uncertainties”.
    • Section 4.5 states there is no information on microorganisms at Dome A – this should be noted in Section 8.
    • Weather should be listed as a gap in knowledge, given the fact that temperature data is available for only one year (Section 4.4.1) and there is a large discrepancy between the two years of precipitation data (Section 2.5.2).
    • Table 25 lists as unknowns several major aspects of the proposed activity, including fuel consumption, personnel numbers and station location. As for the Time Schedule, it would be helpful for consideration of the likely impacts if a range (maximum and minimum limits) was identified for these aspects.
9. Environmental Management Plan
    • It was suggested that the Environmental Management Plan (Section 7), the Emergency Response and Contingency Plan (Section 2.6.3) and the Waste Management Plan (Section 2.8) should be included in the final CEE.
Appendix B. Editorial comments raised by ICG participants

Reference
Comment
Figures
Suggest providing explanatory captions and/or legends to allow interpretation of each Figure, as appropriate.
Page 8, 3rd and 4th last lines
Suggest using the official term “International Polar Year 2007 – 2008” instead of “4th International Polar Year” (also on Page 20, 1st line).
Page 13, 2nd para.
It is expected to “restore the records dated back to the Miocene Period”. The Miocene covers the period of approximately 5 to 23 million years before present, which conflicts with the statement in Section 1.3.1 that preliminary studies indicate the possibility of obtaining a core representing 1.2 to 1.5 million years.
Page 17, 2nd line
Change "litter" to "little"
Page 20, 1st para.
Expand the acronym “PANDA”
Page 24, 6th para.
Explain what is meant by the term “intelligent dust”
Page 26, Section 1.3.6, 1st line
Insert "a" – "… and play a very …" 
Page 27, 1st and 2nd lines
Replace hyphens with commas
Page 29, last line
Font used for "(SCAR)" is different from the rest of the document
Page 37, 1st dot-point
Suggest replacing “Austral summer Station: open from the early January to the early February of the next year.” with “Austral Summer Station: open for one month each year from early January to early February.”
Note: Is the summer station only intended to operate from January to February, or is this a mistake?
Page 38, 3rd last line
Change to "… will be carried out …" 
Page 41, Section 2.4.3, 1st para., 4th line (and elsewhere)
Change to "cargoes" to "cargo"
Page 41, Figure 13
The red line marking the route of the Xuelong has been transposed to the left
Page 41, Section 2.4.3, 2nd para., 2nd line
Delete full stop (.) after "kerosene"
Page 43, Table 4 and elsewhere
It would assist the reader if references throughout the document to quantities of fuel used the same units (e.g. litres or tons or cubic metres). 
Page 44, 8th line
Change "trainings are" to "training is"
Page 46, 2nd para.
Insert comma (,) after "communication sector"
Page 47, Table 5
It is not clear which season the items listed against the Logistic (emergency) building will be installed (i.e. 2008/09 or 2009/10)
Page 50, Figure 18
Suggest adding a label for the bathroom facilities (which appear to be located adjacent to #8 technical area and storage?)
Page 50, 5th last line
Suggest replacing “…such as the new station of the United States at the Pole point” with “… such as the new U.S. Amundsen-Scott South Pole elevated station.”
Page 51, 9th last line
Change "insolating" to "insulating" 
Page 51, 6th last line
Change "joint" to "join"
Page 52, Figure 19
Provide units for the dimensions given (centimetres?)
Page 57, 5th last line
Change "attendee" to "attendance" 
Page 58, Figure 23
Change "Gray Water" to "Grey Water"
Page 60, 3rd para., last line
Insert full stop (.) after "Dome A Station" 
Page 60, 2nd para., lines 7 and 8
Change "… difficulty and challenge for …"… to "difficult and challenging for …" 
Page 65, Section 2.5.10, 1st line
Change "past" to "passed" 
Page 67, 3rd bullet point
Suggested replacing “To use as much recycle water and solid waste as possible and to minimise disposal of solid wastes and discharge of treated water up to the standards.” with “To recycle water as much as possible and reduce production of solid waste so as to minimise disposal of solid wastes and discharge of treated water.”
Page 67, Section 2.6.1, 3rd line
Section 2.6.1 states that the maximum range of field scientific activities in summer will be 80 km from the station, but this seems inconsistent with statements in section 1.3.2 about plans to conduct a detailed geomorphological survey of the Gamburtsev Mountains, which are less than 100 km away from Dome A. 
Page 68, Section 2.6.2
A table showing the station construction timetable with contingencies built into it would be helpful.
Page 69, Section 2.8.1, 2nd para.
The solid waste categories listed on page 69 differ from those on page 96.

Page 70, 10th line
Change "easy" to "easily" 
Page 71, Section 3.1, 3rd para. 
Suggest replacing “South Pole Station of the United States” with “the United States Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station.”
Page 75, 7th and 11th lines
Change "later" to "latter" 
Page 76, 1st para.
Throughout the document inconsistent figures are given for the straight-line distance and over-land traverse distance between Zhongshan and Dome A. Section 4.1 states that the linear distance from the Dome A station location is 1228 km and that the over-land route is 1280 km. Other distances are given, including 1250 km (Page 42, Figure 14) and 1200 km (Page 42, Section 2.4.3).
Page 76, 5th last line
Change "place" to "places" 
Page 79, 4th last line
Change "Beings" to "beings" (lower case) 
Page 79, Figure 29 and page 80, Figures 30 & 31
Explain in the figure captions or elsewhere the meaning of the labels 
“Eagle” and “LGB69”.
Page 83
Suggest presenting the information given on page 83 in a table, and using this to replace the current Table 21 (pg 102), which contains no description of the criteria for ranking “probability”.
Page 87, 2nd para.
If the fuel required for heating and operating the station is accounted for within the “28 tons for the short distance transportation of vehicles in the station area”, suggest rewording this to read “…and 28 tons for facilities operations, heating and short distance vehicle transportation in the station area.”
Page 91, 6th line
The font used for "Fuel and oil" is different from the rest of the document 
Page 98, Section 5.8.2, 3rd line
"I" in "Information" to be unbolded 
Page 98 and 99, Sections 5.8 – 5.10
The discussion of impacts on fauna and flora in sections 5.8, 5.9 and 5.10 could be consolidated.
Page 113, 6th last line
"t" in "the" to be unbolded 


