ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                              11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/WP 31              
19 November 1992              
Original: English              


TO REPORT OF WORKING GROUP I              
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVII ATCM              

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
Report of Working Group I
to the Plenary of the XVIIth ATCM

Working Group I held meetings on 13, 16, 17, 18 and 19 November
in order to deal with the following agenda items:
6- Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
7- Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System
13- Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty
Area
The Working Group I drafted a number of paragraphs concerning the
above mentioned items, to be included in the Final Report of the
XVIIth ATCM.

Item 6 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty

a) Implementation

( ) The Representative of the Depositary Government informed the
Meeting that 36 Contracting Parties, including 26 Consultative
Parties, now had signed the Protocol since its opening for
signature on 4 October 1991 in Madrid.
With regard to the entry into force, for which ratification by all
Consultative Parties is required, the Representatives of the
Consultative Parties informed the Meeting on the progress achieved
by them in the process of ratification including the preparation
of national legislation to implement the Protocol and its
Annexes. From these reports it appeared that one Party had
already been able to deposit its instrument of ratification, that
others would be able to do so in the next months and that others
would need until 1994 to do so.
Similar reports were represented by the other Contracting Parties
represented at the Meeting.
One Contracting Party stressed the desirability of ensuring
uniformity of interpretation of those provisions of the Protocol
and its Annexes which required national legislation or other
measures by the Parties for their implementation. It was agreed
that this aspect was of considerable importance and would require
direct contacts between Parties through, for instance, diplomatic
channels, as would seem useful.

( ) It was also agreed to include this item in the agenda for the
next Consultative Meeting.

b) Committee on Environmental Protection

( ) The Meeting received Working Papers from the delegations of
Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 9), New Zealand (XVII ATCM/WP 10) and
Australia (XVII ATCM/WP 20) regarding draft rules of procedure and
other aspects involved in the establishment of the Committee for
Environmental Protection, foreseen in Articles 11 and 12 of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Such
draft rules of procedure will need to be adopted by the Committee itself, and approved subsequently by the Consultative Meeting.

( ) Meetings of the CEP should be held in the same location as, and immediately before, the annual ATCM. There should, however, be provision made in the Rules of Procedure for the Committee to meet in a different location, and more frequently, if circumstances require. One delegation offered to host any ad hoc intersessional activities of the Committee, as might be agreed upon.

It was understood that the Committee would be assisted by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to be created and would not require a separate Secretariat of its own,, but would make use of the administrative facilities provided by the host government at their sessions.

( ) There was also general support for the view that the stablishment of the Committee and the functioning of the Committee should be possible as soon as the Protocol would enter into force. To prepare for this an informal contact group under the Chairmanship of Ambassador Jorge Berguno of Chile prepared draft rules of procedure in accordance with paragraph 16 of the Report from the XVI ATCM. These draft Rules of Procedure are annexed to this Report.

c) Liability Annex

( ) The Meeting discussed under item 6 the question of future action with respect to the undertaking in Article 16 of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability for damage arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area and covered by the Protocol, with a view to their inclusion in one or more Annexes. Written contributions to this discussion were received from the delegations of The Netherlands (XVII ATCM/WP 8) and Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 11).

( ) The Meeting reiterated the wish expressed in the Final Act of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting that work on their elaboration could begin at an early stage and acknowledged the importance of developing a liability regime as being significant for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

( ) The Meeting, therefore, agreed to convene a meeting of legal experts in accordance with Recommendation IV-24 to undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability as called for under Article 16 of the Protocol.

( ) It was further agreed that prior to the convening of that meeting and in order to ensure adequate preparation of its work, proposals should be prepared and exchanged through the normal means of diplomatic communication. On the basis of agreement reached through diplomatic channels a first meeting of experts will be convened before the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting.
item 7
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

     (  )  The Consultative Meeting devoted considerable time in discussing  the establishment of the Secretariat, its location, 
functions,  composition, legal  status and sharing  of costs 
involved.

     (  )  Consensus  existed that a Secretariat should be 
established to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
and the Committee on Environmental Protection in performing their 
functions.

     (  )  Two Contracting Parties, Argentina and the United 
States of America, offered  Buenos Aires and Washington D.C. 
respectively,  to serve as headquarters for the proposed 
Secretariat.

     (  )  The Delegation of Argentina provided  detailed 
information on the infrastructure and other facilities which its 
Government was ready to make available for this purpose as well as 
some possible criteria for privileges and immunities to be granted 
to the Secretariat.

     (  )  The Delegation of the United States  stressed the 
advantages of locating the  Secretariat at the  site of the 
Depositary Government.

     (  )  A number of Delegations expressed themselves in favour 
of the Argentine offer. In this context views were expressed 
favouring the insertion of Latin America in the institutional 
framework of the Antarctic Treaty system.

     (  )  No decision has yet been taken on this specific issue.

     (  )  Progress achieved in the consideration of the other main 
issues involved is reflected in the report and texts annexed 
hereto. These texts were elaborated by a Contact Group of Working 
Group I, chaired by Prof. Francesco Francioni of the Delegation of 
Italy.

     (  )  The need for further work on this matter was 
acknowledged, including further consultations through normal means 
of diplomatic communication coordinated by the Chairman of the 
XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

     (  )  In this context, upon the offer made by the Republic of 
Italy, it was decided that an Informal Meeting of the Parties will
be held in Italy, before the XVIIIth ATCM with a view to reaching 
overall agreement on all the issues involved.

b) Public Availability of Documents

( ) One delegation pointed out that as a result of decisions 
taken by earlier ATCM's all official documents of all Consultative 
Meetings held so far were now publicly available, with the 
exception of those of the Tenth and Eleventh Special Consultative 
Meetings. To enable the Eighteenth Consultative Meeting to decide 
on making also those documents publicly available it would be 
useful if the host Governments to these Meetings would draw up 
lists of all official documents. The Representatives of Chile and 
Spain stated their willingness to prepare such lists for 
consideration at the XVIIIth ATCM.

) Examination of Recommendations

( ) The delegation of China presented a Working Paper (XVII 
ATCM/WP 15) concerning the examination of Recommendations. The 
Meeting generally welcomed China's proposal to draw up a list of 
Recommendations which contain obligations still to be met. It was 
recognized that the proposal was a helpful and practical way to 
address the difficulties that some Contracting Parties have 
encountered in the course of implementing their 
recommendations.

It was also recognized that it might be useful to draft a list of 
recommendations which would be superseded by the entry into force 
of the Protocol and its Annexes.

It was agreed that these proposals should be taken into account in 
future updating of the Handbook in the existing languages.

The Chinese delegation proposed that future Recommendations be 
reserved to substantive matters which are closely related to the 
furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Antarctic 
Treaty and its Protocol as well as other legal instruments in 
effect within the Antarctic Treaty T system. Other matters, 
however, preferably should be determined in the form of a 
Decision, and be reflected in the Final Reports of Consultative 
Meetings.

The Meeting decided to consider further the question of the 
examination of Recommendations at the next Consultative Meeting.

d) Exchange of information

( ) The Meeting received a Working Paper from the delegation of 
Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 13).

( ) The Meeting agreed that the exchange of information among the 
Contracting Parties needed further improvement. The (anticipated) 
establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection should also be considered 
as important measures achieving this end.

( ) It was agreed that this matter would again be considered by 
the XVIIIth ATCM.
e) Amendment to ATCM Rules of Procedure.

( ) The Meeting receiv[?]ed a Working Paper from the delegation of 
the United Kingdom (XVII ATCM/WP 24), in which a number of 
amendments to the ATCM's Rules of Procedure were proposed,
reflecting arrangements arising from the decision agreed to at 
the XVIth ATCM to move to a cycle of annual Consultative Meetings 
without preceding Preparatory Meetings.

    In addition, a further amendment was proposed to facilitate the 
participation in the substantive work of Consultative Meetings by 
international organizations which had been invited to designate an 
expert to attend the Consultative Meeting.

    The Meeting decided to adopt these proposed amendments to its 
rules of procedure as they are reflected in XVII ATCM/WP 24/rev.2 
The revised rules of procedure are attached to this Final Report 
as Annex. . .

Item 13 - Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic 
Treaty Area

( ) The Meeting received a report from Mr. Antonio Jose Guerreiro 
(Brazil), Chairman of the informal meeting on tourism held in 
Venice on 9 and 10 November in accordance with Recommendation 
XVI-13. The informal meeting examined the issues identified in 
that Recommendation without arriving at any specific conclusions.

( ) Working Group I studied proposals set out in WP/1 for a draft 
Annex to the Protocol on tourism prepared by Chile,France, 
Germany, Italy and Spain and other documents and proposals 
prepared by Australia ( ), the UK ( ), and the United 
States.(XV ATCM /WP 6 , XVII ATCM/INFO31 ).

( ) The Meeting undertook an analysis of the existing 
Recommendations regarding tourism and non-governmental activities, 
as well as the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes. In addition, more detailed 
consideration was given to the list of items contained in 
paragraph (ii) of Recommendation XVI-13.

    All Parties stressed that the Protocol and its Annexes apply to 
all activities in Antarctica, including tourist and non-
governmental activities.

    Some Parties, including the initiators of a draft Annex to the 
Protocol, maintained that more precise regulation having a legally 
binding force was required for such activities. Some other Parties 
were of the view that with respect to environmental protection the 
most important and immediate task is the early entry into force 
and implementation of the Protocol and its Annexes. Another group 
put forward the view that implementation of the Protocol and 
relevant provisions of the Treaty and Recommendations would be 
promoted  in a practical way by providing a guiding statement of 
provisions for Parties and organizers of tourist and non-
governmental activities to assist in understanding and meeting 
relevant obligations.

( ) The negative impacts which the growing number of tourists 
might have on the conduct of scientific activities in Antarctica 
by the Parties were also considered, both in the light of the 
working and information papers mentioned above and in the light of
oral and written contributions by representatives of COMNAP,SCAR,
WTO, IUCN, IAATO, IMO, ASOC and PATA, who attended the meeting.

( ) Some Parties, including the five Parties that had initiated
the draft annex mentioned above, proposed the convening of a
meeting in 1993 before the next ATCM in order to continue the
urgent examination of the issues identified in Recommendation XVI-
13, which remained pending. Some other Parties could not agree to
this proposal and felt that Recommendation XVI-13 had been
adequately discussed. Still other Parties would agree with an
intersessional meeting that was properly prepared and gave
prospects of progress. They suggested their papers contained a
number of considerations that could be examined in future work.
