ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

VENICE
11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 34
19 November 1992
Original: English

DRAFT FINAL REPORT OF THE XVIITH ANTARCTIC
TREATY MEETING

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
Draft Final Report
of the XVII Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting

(1) Pursuant to Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty,
representatives of the Consultative Parties (Argentina, Australia,
Belgium, Brazil, Chile, China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany,
India, Italy, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, the Russian Federation, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Uruguay) met in
Venice from 11 to 20 November 1992, for the purpose of exchanging
informations, holding consultations, and considering and
recommending to their Governments measures in furtherance of the
principles and objectives of the Treaty.

(2) The Meeting was also attended by delegations from Contracting
Parties to the Antarctic Treaty which are not Consultative Parties
(Austria, Canada, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Greece,
Hungary, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea , Romania and
Switzerland).

(3) Given the short time between ATCM XVI and ATCM XVII, no
Preparatory Meeting was held. All necessary arrangements were
made through diplomatic contacts. A Meeting with Embassy
Representatives was held in Rome on August 4th, 1992 with the
purpose of finalizing the provisional agenda. Information on the
meeting was distributed to delegates (XVII ATCM / INFO 1).

(4) The Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), the President of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) were invited to
attend the Meeting as observers in accordance with Rule 2 of the
Revised Rules of Procedure of 1987 (see paragraphs  and
below).

(5) Pursuant to paragraph 24 of the Final Report of the XVIth
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, the Chairman of the Council
of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP) was invited to
attend the Meeting and to present a report on the activities of
COMNAP, under Recommendation XIII-2

(6) Pursuant to Rule 35 of the Revised Rules of Procedure of
1987, several international organizations having a scientific or
technical interest in Antarctica were invited to appoint experts
to attend the XVIIth ATCM and to assist in discussion of specific
agenda items. The following organizations took part in the
proceedings:
- the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC)
       (agenda items 6, 9, 10, 11, 13)
- the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)
       (agenda item 16)
2

- the International Maritime Organization (IMO)
        (agenda items 9, 15)
- the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
        (agenda item 15)

- the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and
        Natural Resources (IUCN-World Conservation Union)
        (agenda items 6, 9, 10, 11, 13)
- the World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
        (agenda item 14)
- the World Tourism Organization (WTO)
        (agenda item 13)

(7) The Meeting accepted the proposal submitted by one delegation
that a representative of the International Association Antarctica
Tour Operators (IAATO), already present in Venice to take part in
the informal working group on Tourism (9,10 November), could
attend the Meeting, as expert, to assist in consideration of
agenda item 13.

(8) The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the
United National Environmental Program (UNEP) were invited to
attend but were unable to take part.

(9) The Meeting was formally open by Mr. Emilio Colombo, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Italy. The opening address is reproduced at
Annex A.

(10) Ambassador Giuseppe Jacoangeli, of the Italian Delegation,
was elected Chairman of the Meeting. Ambassador Jacoangeli thanked
the delegations for having elected him Chairman.

(11) The Chairman proposed that Dr Adriano Gasperi, Scientific
Attache' to the Netherlands be appointed Executive Secretary, and
that Dr Silvio Dottorini, Scientific Attache' to Australia and Dr
Franco Vicenzotti of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs be
appointed as Deputy Executive Secretaries of the Meeting. This
proposal was adopted.

(12) In order to save time, the Meeting agreed that delegations
not deliver opening statements, but, instead, provide their texts
for circulation and inclusion in the Final Report. The texts of
the opening statements are reproduced at Annex A.

(13) The following agenda was adopted:

1. Opening of the Meeting
2. Election of Officers
3. Opening addresses
4. Adoption of agenda
5. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:Reports
3

a) under Recommendation XIII - 2:

     i) the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living 
        Resources (CCAMLR)

    ii) the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in his capacity as representative 
        of the Depositary Government of the Convention for the Conservation of 
        Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

   iii) the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)

   iv) the Head of the Delegation of the United States of America in his capacity as 
        representative of the Depositary Government

    v) the Convenor of the informal group of Treaty Parties in the United Nations

   vi) the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)

b) in relation to Article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty

6. Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:

   a) Implementation

   b) Committee for Environmental Protection

   c) Liability Annex

7. Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System:

   a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

   b) Public Availability of Documents

   c) Examination of Recommendations

   d) Exchange of Information

   e) Amendment to ATCM Rules of Procedure

8. Inspections under the Antarctic Treaty

9. Environmental Monitoring

10. Implementation of Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures
11. The Antarctic Protected Area System

12. International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic 
Co-operation

13. Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities in the 
Antarctic Treaty Area

14. Antarctic Meteorology and Telecommunications

15. Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation 
in the Southern Ocean

16. Co-operation in Hydrographic Surveying and Charting 
of Antarctic Waters

17. Air Safety in Antarctica

18. Questions related to the exercise of jurisdiction 
in Antarctica

19. Preparation of the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting:

      a) date and place of the XVIIIth Consultative 
Meeting

      b) invitation of international and non-governmental 
organizations

      c) preparation of the Agenda of the XVIIIth 
Consultative Meeting

20. Any other business

21. Adoption of the Report

22. Closing of the Meeting

(14) In accordance with the Chairman's suggestion

(a) discussion of item 1 to 6 (a), 7 (general presentation) 
18 to 22 took place in plenary session

(b) the remaining items were remitted to two Working 
Groups:

      (i) Working Group I, under the chairmanship of 
Mr Pieter Verbeek of the Netherlands, discussed 
items 6, 7 and 13

      (ii) Working Group II, under the chairmanship of Mr 
Roberto Puceiro Ripoll of Uruguay, discussed items 
8 to 12 and 14 to 17.

Item 5 a)
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System: Reports
(15) Pursuant to Recommendation XIII - 2, the Meeting received 
reports from the following:

a)  the Chairman of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)

b)  the Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom in 
his capacity as representative of the Depositary 
Government of  the Convention for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Seals (CCAS)

c)  the President of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic 
Research (SCAR)

d)  the Head of the Delegation of the United States of 
America in his capacity as representative of the 
Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty

e)  the Permanent Representative of Germany to the United 
Nations in New York in his capacity as Convenor of the 
informal group of Treaty Parties

f)  the Chairman of the Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programs (COMNAP)

(16) The report of the Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) was presented, on 
behalf of its Chairman, by Dr Silvio Dottorini of Italy 
(Annex ....).

(17) The Head of the Delegation of the United Kingdom, Dr M.e 
Richardson, in his capacity as representative of the Depositary 
Government of the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic 
Seals (CCAS), presented a report. The report is appended (Annex 
....).

(18) The report of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic 
Research (SCAR) was presented, on behalf of its President, by Dr 
D.W.H.Walton. The report is appended (Annex ....).

(19) The Head of the Delegation of the United States of America, 
Mr R.Tucker Scully, in his capacity as representative of the 
Depositary Government of the Antarctic Treaty, presented a report. 
The table covering the status of the Recommendations adopted in 
compliance with Article IX of the Treaty is at Annex .....

(20) The Head of the Delegation of Germany, Amb.D.Granow in his 
capacity as representative of the Convenor of the informal group 
of Treaty Parties in New York, presented a report on the Antarctic 
item in the United Nations which was received with much interest 
Annex....
(21) The Chairman of the Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes (COMNAP) Mr Mario Zucchelli submitted a report to the Meeting. The report is at Annex ......

(22) The Meeting recognized the valuable contribution of SCAR and encouraged it to continue working to identify, promote and co-ordinate research aimed at improving the understanding of Antarctica and its role in global processes.

(23) The Meeting also recognized the importance of SCAR in providing objective scientific information and advice to the Parties.

(24) The Meeting welcomed the report presented by Mr. Mario Zucchelli, Chairman of COMNAP, which provided a comprehensive picture of the technical, logistic and environmental problems involved in Antarctic operations.

(25) The Meeting reaffirmed the value of reports to ATCMs by COMNAP on its activities. The Meeting further endorsed full and continuing participation by COMNAP at future ATCMs to provide advice and assistance on issues relating to Antarctic operations.

Item 5 b)
Reports in relation to Article III(2) of the Antarctic Treaty

(26) The representative of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), Dr N.A. Streten, presented a report to the Meeting on the activities of WMO in relation to Antarctica. The report is at Annex .....

(27) The representative of the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), Ms Barbara Bond submitted a report to the Meeting, concerning the recently established Permanent Working Group on Co-operation in Antarctica. The report is at Annex ....

(28) The representative of the Antarctic and Southern Ocean Coalition (ASOC), Mr James Barnes, presented a report to the Meeting. The report is at Annex C ( )

Item 6
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

a) Implementation

(29) The Representative of the Depositary Government informed the Meeting that 36 Contracting Parties including 26 Consultative Parties, had now signed the Protocol since its opening for signature on 4 October 1991 in Madrid.

With regard to entry into force, for which ratification by all Consultative Parties is required, the Representatives of the Consultative Parties informed the Meeting on the progress achieved
7

by them in the process of ratification including the preparation 
of national legislation to implement the Protocol and its Annexes. 
From these reports it appeared that one Party, Spain,  had already 
been able to deposit its instrument of ratification, that others 
would be able to do so in the next months and that others would 
need until 1994 to do so.

Similar reports were presented by the other Contracting Parties 
represented at the Meeting.

One Contracting Party stressed the desirability of ensuring 
uniformity of interpretation of those provisions of the Protocol 
and its Annexes which required national legislation or other 
measures by the Parties for their implementation. It was agreed 
that this aspect was of considerable importance and would require 
direct contacts between Parties through, for instance, diplomatic 
channels, as would seem useful.

(30) It was also agreed to include this item in the Agenda for 
the next Consultative Meeting.

b) Committee on Environmental Protection

(31 ) The Meeting received Working Papers from the delegations of 
Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 9), New Zealand (XVII ATCM/WP 10) and 
Australia (XVII ATCM/WP 20) regarding draft rules of procedure and 
other aspects involved in the establishment of the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, foreseen in Articles 11 and 12 of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty. Such 
draft rules of procedure will need to be adopted by the Committee 
itself, and approved subsequently by the Consultative Meeting.

(32) Meetings of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) 
should be held in the same location as, and immediately before, 
the annual ATCM. There should, however, be provision made in the 
Rules of Procedure for the Committee to meet in a different 
location, and more frequently, if circumstances require. One 
delegation offered to host any ad hoc intersessional activities of 
the Committee, as might be agreed upon. It was understood that the 
Committee would be assisted by the Antarctic Treaty Secretariat to 
be created and would not require a separate Secretariat of its 
own, but would make use of the administrative facilities provided 
by the host government at their sessions.

(33) There was also general support for the view that the 
establishment of the Committee and the functioning of the 
Committee should be possible as soon as the Protocol entered into 
force. To prepare for this and informal contact group under the 
Chairmanship of Ambassador Jorge Berguno of Chile prepared draft 
rules of procedure in accordance with paragraph 16 of the Report 
from the XVIth ATCM. These draft Rules of Procedure are annexed to 
this Report.at Annex....

c) Liability Annex

(34) The Meeting discussed under item 6 the question of future 
action with respect to the undertaking in Article 16 of the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to 
elaborate rules and procedures relating to  liability for damage 
arising from activities taking place in the Antarctic Treaty area
and covered by the Protocol, with a view to their inclusion in one or more Annexes. Written contributions to this discussion were received from the delegations of the Netherlands (XVII ATCM/WP 8) and Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 11).

(35)  The Meeting reiterated the wish expressed in the Final Act of the Eleventh Antarctic Treaty Special Consultative Meeting that work on their elaboration could begin at an early stage and acknowledged the importance of developing a liability regime as being significant for the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated ecosystems.

(36) The Meeting, therefore, agreed to convene a meeting of legal experts in accordance with Recommendation IV-24 to undertake to elaborate rules and procedures relating to liability as called for under Article 16 of the Protocol.

(37) It was further agreed that prior to the convening of that meeting and in order to ensure adequate preparation of its work, proposals should be prepared and exchanged through the normal means of diplomatic communication. On the basis of agreement reached through diplomatic channels a first meeting of experts will be convened before the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting.

Item 7
Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System

     a) Organizational aspects. Secretariat

(38)  The Consultative Meeting devoted considerable time to discussing the establishment of the Secretariat, its location, functions, composition, legal status and sharing of costs involved.

(39) Consensus existed that a Secretariat should be established to assist the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting and the Committee for Environmental Protection in performing their functions.

(40) Two Contracting Parties, Argentina and the United States of America, offered Buenos Aires and Washington D.C. respectively, to serve as headquarters for the proposed Secretariat.

(41) The Delegation of Argentina provided detailed information on the infrastructure and other facilities which its Government was ready to make available for this purpose as well as some possible criteria for privileges and immunities to be granted to the Secretariat.

(42) The Delegation of the United States stressed the advantages of locating the Secretariat at the site of the Depositary Government.

(43) A number of Delegations expressed themselves in favour of the Argentine offer. In this context views were expressed favouring the insertion of Latin America in the institutional framework of the Antarctic Treaty system.
9

(44) No decision has yet been taken on this specific issue.

(45) Progress achieved in the consideration of the other main issues involved is reflected in the report and texts annexed hereto , (Annex....). These texts were elaborated by a contact group of Working Group I, chaired by Prof. Francesco Francioni of the Delegation of Italy.

(46) The need for further work on this matter was acknowledged, including further consultations through normal means of diplomatic communication coordinated by the Chairman of the XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

(47) In this context, upon the offer made by the Republic of Italy, it was decided that an Informal Meeting of the Parties will be held in Italy, before the XVIIIth ATCM with a view to reaching overall agreement on all the issues involved.

b) Public Availability of Documents

(48) One delegation pointed out that as a result of decision taken by earlier ATCM's all official documents of all Consultative Meetings held so far were now publicly available, with the exception of those of the Tenth and Eleventh Special Consultative Meetings. In view of the interest in the documents of these Meetings, it was proposed that the host governments should aim to circulate the list of official documents as soon as possible through diplomatic channels. If there were no objections within a period of three months to their public release, the host government should so advise other Parties through diplomatic channels. The representatives of the hosting governments of X and XI ATSCMs indicated their willingness to follow this procedure.

c) Examination of Recommendations

(49) The delegation of China presented a Working Paper (XVII ATCM/WP 15) concerning the examination of Recommendations. The Meeting generally welcomed China's proposal to draw up a list of Recommendations which contain obligations still to be met. It was recognized that the proposal was a helpful and practical way to address the difficulties that some Contracting Parties have encountered in the course of implementing their Recommendations.

(50) It was also recognized that it might be useful to draft a list of Recommendations which would be superseded by the entry into force of the Protocol and its Annexes.

(51) The Meeting agreed that this proposal should be taken into account in future updating of the Handbook in the existing languages.

(52) The Chinese delegation proposed that future Recommendations be reserved to substantive matters which are closely related to the furtherance of the principles and objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and its Protocol as well as other legal instruments in
10

effect within the Antarctic Treaty system. Other matters, however, 
preferably should be determined in the form of a Decision, and be 
reflected in the Final Reports of Consultative Meetings.

(53)  The Meeting decided to consider further the question of the 
examination of Recommendations at the next Consultative Meeting.

d) Exchange of information

(54)  The Meeting received a Working Paper from the delegation of 
Chile (XVII ATCM/WP 13).

(55)  The Meeting agreed that the exchange of information among 
the Contracting Parties needed further improvement. The 
anticipated establishment of an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat and 
of the Committee for Environmental Protection should also be 
considered as important measures achieving this end.

(56)  It was agreed that this matter would again be considered by 
the XVIIIth ATCM.

e) Amendment to ATCM Rules of procedure.

(57)  The Meeting received a Working Paper by the delegation of 
the United Kingdom (XVII ATCM/WP 24), in which a number of 
amendments to the ATCM's Rules of Procedure were proposed, 
reflecting arrangements arising from the decision agreed to at the 
XVIth ATCM to move to a cycle of annual Consultative Meetings 
without preceding Preparatory Meetings

(58)  In addition, a further amendment was proposed to facilitate 
the participation in the substantive work of Consultative Meetings 
by experts representing international organizations which had been 
invited to designate an expert to attend the Consultative 
Meeting.

(59)  The Meeting decided to adopt these proposed amendments to 
its Rules of Procedure as they are reflected in XVII ATCM/WP 
24/rev.2

(60)  The revised Rules of Procedure are attached to this Final 
Report as Annex....

Item 8 Inspection under the Antarctic Treaty

(61)  A number of delegations advised that they would be carrying 
out inspections during 1992/93. None had been carried out since 
the XVIth Consultative Meeting.

(62)  The Meeting noted that inspections are a fundamental element 
of the Antarctic Treaty. It further emphasized the importance of 
promoting inspections within the Antarctic Treaty as a means of 
monitoring activities in Antarctica and exchanging information. 
The meeting also stressed that inspections demonstrate the 
transparency of the Antarctic Treaty.

(63)  The Meeting noted that inspections, in addition to verifying
11

adherence to the fundamental principles and objectives of the 
Antarctic Treaty, now require emphasis on environmental matters.

(64) The Meeting noted the high cost of conducting inspections. 
Logistic co-operation between Parties was seen as a means of 
reducing these costs.

(65) To enhance the quality of inspections and to assist in 
comparing inspection results, the Meeting considered that there 
would be value in having an agreed checklist of items that might 
be referred to when conducting inspections.

(66) The Meeting agreed to invite SCAR and COMNAP to prepare an 
inspection checklist, based on existing examples such as those 
indicated in paragraph 59 of the Final Report of the XVIth ATCM to 
assist assessment of adherence to the requirements of the 
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. It 
was recognized that such a checklist would not limit a Party's 
individual action in conducting inspections.

(67) ASOC, attending the Meeting as an invited expert, expressed 
the view that a permanent technical and scientific team should be 
established to carry out inspections relating to the Antarctic 
environment. A number of delegations expressed their view that a 
permanent inspection team is unnecessary and that the present 
arrangements for inspections are appropriate.

Item 9 
Environmental Monitoring

(68) The Meeting welcomed and considered the valuable Report and 
the Recommendations of the First Meeting of Experts on 
Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica (XVII ATCM/INFO9). The 
terms of reference for the Meeting, held in Buenos Aires on 1-4 
June, 1992, were set forth in paragraphs 62-66 of the Report of 
ATCM XVI (Bonn, 1991). Paragraphs 106-109 of the above report 
passed also to the Meeting the consideration of the creation of an 
Antarctic environmental and scientific data system.

(69) The Meeting also welcomed and considered the report by 
SCAR/COMNAP (XVII ATCM/ WP 5) describing actions that could be 
taken to develop a coordinated data management system, with a view 
to improving the comparability and accessibility of both 
scientific and environmental data being collected by national 
programs as called for by ATCM Recommendations XIII-5 and XV-16.

(70) With regard to environmental monitoring the Meeting noted 
and endorsed the general objectives of Environmental Monitoring 
set forth in paragraph 32 of the Report of the First Meeting of 
Experts on Environmental Monitoring and the specific objectives of 
Antarctic Environmental Impact Monitoring set forth in paragraph 
33 of the Report.

(71) The Meeting considered the conclusions set forth in 
paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Report, in particular that: (i) the 
nature and scale of most activities in Antarctica at present are 
such that they are unlikely to have significant adverse
12

environmental impact as defined in Article 3 of, and the Annexes 
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection except at the local 
level; (ii) the possibility and significance of environmental 
impacts depend upon the location, timing, and scale as well as the 
nature of the activities; and (iii) the activities and events most 
likely to have impacts of possible concern are:

a) station and airstrip construction and logistic operations;

b) waste water and sewage disposal;

c) incineration of waste;

d) power and heat generation;

e) activities involving or affecting native flora and fauna;

f) scientific research; and

g) accidents resulting in fuel spills or other types of en-
vironmental contamination.

(72) The Meeting also considered the examples of activities 
causing possible impacts on the Antarctic environment set forth in 
Table 3 of the Report of the First Meeting of Experts.

(73) The Meeting further noted paragraph 103 of the Report which 
points out that some form of monitoring may be required to ensure 
compliance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection. For 
example, at least a sub-set of the seal and bird colonies visited 
regularly by tourists, researchers and others should be monitored 
to verify that they are not being affected adversely by human 
activities. SCAR should be asked for advice on types of monitoring 
needed to verify that human activities do not have unforeseen 
effects on Antarctic birds, seals and plants.

(74) The Meeting took special note of paragraph 49 of the Report 
of the First Meeting of Experts, which indicates that 
environmental impact monitoring programmes should be designed to 
answer specific questions or to test specific hypotheses.

(75) The Meeting also took special note of paragraphs 107-110 of 
the Report, which point out that environmental impact monitoring 
programmes should be carefully designed, practicable, cost-
effective and focused only on what is essential to meet the 
requirements of the Protocol. Unnecessary monitoring will consume 
substantial resources that may diminish the ability of Parties to 
undertake key research thus reducing the overall value of 
Antarctic science.

(76) The Meeting noted the concern expressed in the Report that 
resources required to meet the environmental monitoring challenge 
may not be available. The Meeting further noted the value of 
developing co-operative programmes as a means for carrying out 
cost-effective and productive monitoring.

(77) On the basis of recommendations of the First Meeting of 
Experts, the Meeting adopted Recommendation XVII-1. The Meeting
13

noted that the recommended activities would assist the work of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection to be established when the 
Protocol enters into force.

(78) With regard to data management, the Meeting considered and 
agreed on the scheme and steps proposed in the Report of the First 
Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring for the creation of 
a cooperative Data Management System. In this regard the Meeting 
agreed that Parties should continue efforts to identify national 
data sets for eventual inclusion in the Antarctic Data Directory. 
Documentation of these data sets should follow the format 
described in paragraph 70 of the Report of the First Meeting of 
Experts on Environmental Monitoring. This format may be 
subsequently modified to make it compatible with the International 
Directory Network referred to in the SCAR/COMNAP Report (XVII 
ATCM/ WP 5).

(79) It was also considered by the Meeting that the Parties 
should convene through their SCAR and COMNAP representatives a 
workshop to help initiate the implementation of the Antarctic Data 
Directory System. The workshop should:

    * identify the steps necessary to establish the Antarctic Data 
Directory System as part of the existing International Directory 
Network;

    * finalize the format for Antarctic Data Directory entries;

    * prepare a draft Antarctic Data Directory for circulation to 
all Parties, including properly formatted entries from 
contributing Parties;

    * identify the kinds of geographic information system currently 
being used by national program operators to organize, store, 
display and analyze Antarctic data; and consider whether the 
Antarctic Digital Topographic Database produced under the auspices 
of SCAR or another system can be used as the basis for a common 
computer map system for plotting data.

(80) The Meeting agreed to consider the need, at the next ATCM, 
for another Meeting of Experts to consider such questions as 
available technologies, monitoring methods and protocols, 
standardization of data collection methods; quality assurance and 
data analysis and interpretation.

(81) The Russian Delegation presented a working paper on 
environmental monitoring (XVII ATCM/WP 30) and the items contained 
therein could help in the discussion of future work.

Item 10
Implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures

(82) On this issue documents were presented by New Zealand (XVII 
ATCM/INFO 19), France (XVII ATCM/INFO 35), Finland (XVII ATCM/INFO 
45 AND 46), United States (XVII ATCM/INFO 68), Germany (ATCM/INFO 
71) and ASOC (XVII ATCM/INFO 84).
14

(83) The Representative of COMNAP reported that it has developed 
practical guidelines relating to implementation of environmental 
impact assessment procedures based on the Protocol on 
Environmental Protection and its Annexes.

(84) The Representative of SCAR reported that the Group of 
Specialists on Environmental Affairs and Conservation (GOSEAC) is 
examining the scientific content of IEE's and CEE's produced so 
far.

(85) The Meeting welcomed these efforts and emphasized the 
importance of continuing efforts to implement the environmental 
assessment procedures set forth in the Protocol on Environmental 
Protection.

Item 11
The Antarctic Protected Area System

11. a) Revised description and proposed management plans for 
Specially Protected Areas.

(86) The United Kingdom tabled a draft Recommendation (XVII 
ATCM/WP 22) setting out revised descriptions and proposed 
management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas:
      SPA No. 1 Taylor Rookery, Mac Robertson Land;
      SPA No. 2 Rookery Island, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land;
      SPA No. 3 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast;
      SPA No. 20 "New College Valley", Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, 
Ross Island.

Management plans for SPAs 1,2, and 3 were prepared by Australia 
and SPA 20 by New Zealand and had been recommended and approved at 
SCAR XXII.
Recommendation.XVII-2 was adopted and it is attached at Annex....

(87) The Meeting agreed that Parties should require that their 
national programme operators and, to the maximum extent possible, 
persons subject to their jurisdiction comply with the provisions 
of the above management plans, and the management plans for SPAs, 
8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 19 annexed to the Report of ATCM XVI.

11. b) Historic Sites and Monuments

(88) Argentina submitted a draft recommendation (XVII ATCM/WP 
27/rev. 2) to designate a wooden plaque and rock cairn at Penguin 
Bay, Southern Coast of Seymour Island (Marambio) (64°16'00" S, 
56°39'10" W) as a Historic Monument.

Recommendation XVII-3 was adopted and it is attached at Annex....

(89) New Zealand announced its intention to propose the listing 
of the northern slopes of Mt. Erebus above Lewis Bay, which was 
the site of the Air New Zealand DC 10 crash in November 1979, as 
an Historic Site as is provided for in Article 8 of Annex 5 of the 
Protocol.
11 c) Review and Implementation of the System

(90) The Meeting considered measures that could be taken to improve the Antarctic Protected Area System and to begin to give effect to the provisions of Protocol Annex V. The Meeting was assisted in this regard by a paper (XVII ATCM/WP4) summarizing the results of a Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas held jointly by SCAR and IUCN, 29 June - 2 July 1992. The Meeting noted that some aspects of this paper related to issues beyond the Protected Area System and that these were not addressed explicitly.

(91) The Meeting noted that, when Protocol Annex V enters into force, all SPAs and SSSIs designated as such by past ATCMs will be designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and be renamed and renumbered accordingly. The Meeting recognized that the management plans for many SSSIs and SPAs may need to be revised at that time to ensure they conform with the provisions of the Protocol. The Meeting also recognized that the Committee for Environmental Protection, which will be established when the Protocol enters into force, will be required to provide its advice. To assist in this regard, it was agreed that the Parties which originally proposed the existing SSSIs and SPAs should review their management plans and be prepared to submit proposed revisions for consideration when the Protocol enters into force. It also was agreed that SCAR could be asked to provide assistance to Parties in reviewing and revising management plans to conform with the provisions of the Protocol.

(92) With regard to the previous point, the Meeting was advised that SCAR was preparing a handbook to assist in the preparation of management plans. The Meeting welcomed this information, recognizing that the handbook could be useful to the Parties and the CEP, as well as SCAR. It urged SCAR to complete and make the handbook available as soon as possible.

(93) The Meeting also was advised that the joint SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Protected Areas had begun revision of the ecosystem classification system developed by SCAR to assist in identifying areas that might usefully be included in the Antarctic Protected Area System. The Meeting noted that the classification system might be useful to the Parties for deciding, and to the CEP for providing advice on, measures necessary to meet the requirements of Article 3 (2) of Protocol Annex V which specifies that the Parties shall seek to include certain types of areas in the series of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. The Meeting urged SCAR and IUCN to complete the revision and make it available as soon as possible.

(94) The Meeting noted that Protocol Annex V will prohibit entry into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas except in accordance with a permit issued under Article 7 of the Annex. The Meeting urged Parties that have not already done so to institute a permit system to begin to give effect to the permitting provisions.

(95) With respect to the preceding point, the Meeting recognized
16

that effective implementation of Annex V will require, where 
appropriate, that ASPAs and ASMAs are marked and posted with 
signs, and that all persons visiting Antarctica are aware of the 
locations and purposes of ASPAs and ASMAs, and the prohibitions 
or restrictions on entry and activities that can be conducted in 
these Areas. Towards this end, the Meeting urged that all Parties 
take such steps as possible to begin to give effect to Article 9 
of Annex V. The Meeting also urged that the need to make such 
information available be considered in the development of the Data 
Information System referenced in paragraphs --- to ---- of this 
Report.

(96) The Meeting noted that ASPAs, ASMAs, and historic sites and 
monuments may need to be visited periodically to ensure that the 
objectives of their management plans are being met. The Meeting 
further noted that a suggested list of information that should be 
collected and included in reports of site visits was developed at, 
and was appended to the Report, of ATCM XIV. The Meeting agreed 
that Parties, through their national committees, would ask SCAR to 
review this list and provide advice on (i) how it should be 
revised to reflect the provisions of the Protocol, (ii) how site 
visits should be carried out, and (iii) how the results of such 
visits should be reported to be most useful in implementing the 
Protocol.

(97) Attention was called to the fact that, under Annex V of the 
Protocol, it would be appropriate in some cases to adopt 
management plans specifying conditions for visiting and activities 
that can be carried out in the vicinity of historic sites and 
monuments. Attention also was drawn to the fact that a number of 
abandoned work sites may have scientific and historic values and 
that program operators should consider such possibilities before 
initiating clean-up operations to give effect to Article 1 (5) of 
Protocol Annex III.

Item 12  
International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Co-operation

(98 ) The Delegation of Japan (XVII ATCM/INFO 37) and Finland 
(XVII ATCM/INFO 44) submitted information papers on co-operation.

(99) Many delegations reported on scientific and logistic co-
operation with other Parties, thus emphasizing the concrete 
results obtained and the need to continue this co-operation within 
the Antarctic Treaty System. Of particular interest was New 
Zealand announcement of and paper on the opening of the 
International Antarctic Center in Christchurch.

(100) The Chilean Delegation presented a Draft Recommendation on 
"Global change research and international co-operation in 
Antarctica" (XVII ATCM/WP 28).

(101) Following a debate on the issue, which underlined the 
significance of the subject and the need for its analysis, 
Recommendation XVII- 4. was drawn up and adopted on the basis of 
the Chilean proposal. The Recommendation XVII-4 is attached at 
Annex...
17

Item 13
Tourism and non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty
Area

(102) The Meeting received a report from Mr Antonio Jose Guerreiro
(Brazil), Chairman of the informal meeting on tourism held in
Venice on 9 and 10 November in accordance with Recommendation
XVI-13. The informal meeting examined the issues identified in
that Recommendation without arriving at any specific conclusions.

(103) Working Group I studied proposals set out in XVII ATCM/WP 1
for a draft Annex to the Protocol on tourism prepared by
Chile,France, Germany, Italy and Spain and other documents and
proposals prepared by Australia (XVII ATCM/WP 14), the UK (XVII
ATCM/WP 2, XVII ATCM/WP 3 and XVII ATCM/INFO 6), and the United
States (XV ATCM /WP 6 , XVII ATCM/INFO 31).

(104)  The Meeting undertook an analysis of the existing
Recommendations regarding tourism and non-governmental activities,
as well as the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the
Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes. In addition, more detailed
consideration was given to the list of items contained in
paragraph (ii) of Recommendation XVI-13.

(105) All Parties stressed that the Protocol and its Annexes
apply to all activities in Antarctica, including tourist and non-
governmental activities.

(106) Some Parties, including the initiators of a draft Annex to
the Protocol, maintained that more precise regulation having
legally binding force was required for such activities. Some other
Parties were of the view that with respect to environmental
protection the most important and immediate task is the early
entry into force and implementation of the Protocol and its
Annexes. Another group put forward the view that implementation of
the Protocol and relevant provisions of the Treaty and
Recommendations would be promoted in a practical way by providing
a guiding statement of provisions for Parties and organizers of
tourist and non-governmental activities to assist in understanding
and meeting relevant obligations.

(107 ) The negative impacts which the growing number of tourists
might have on the conduct of scientific activities in Antarctica
by the Parties were also considered, both in the light of the
working and information papers mentioned above and in the light of
oral and written contributions by representatives of COMNAP,SCAR,
WTO, IUCN, IAATO, IMO, ASOC and PATA, who attended the meeting.

(108) Some Parties, including the five Parties that had initiated
the draft annex mentioned above, proposed the convening of a
meeting in 1993 before the next ATCM in order to continue the
urgent examination of the issues identified in Recommendation XVI-
13, which remained pending. Some other Parties could not agree to
this proposal and felt that Recommendation XVI-13 had been
adequately discussed. Still other Parties would agree with an
intersessional meeting that was properly prepared and gave
prospects of progress. They suggested their papers contained a
number of considerations that could be examined in future work.

Item 14
Antarctic meteorology and telecommunications

(109) Under this item, two information papers (XVII ATCM/INFO 29
and 49) were provided by WMO. The representative of WMO presented
the principal points of INFO 49 which referred to improvements on
Antarctic telecommunications using satellite technology and to the
deficiencies in the existing observational networks. A plea was
made to Treaty Parties to improve meteorological networks by
deploying Automatic Weather Stations at appropriate and remote
locations, by deploying ocean buoys at higher latitudes, by
improving the frequency of upper air observations and by siting
any new upper air stations to fill gaps in the existing network.

(110)  The work carried out in Antarctica by the World
Meteorological Organization, both in the field of weather
forecasting and of atmospheric science, was welcomed. These
activities include coordinating efforts, preparing recommendations
and distributing specific information on meteorological and
atmospheric phenomena affecting Antarctica and the global system.

(111) The Meeting acknowledged that the trend of observed ozone
depletion continued. On October 4th 1992, Japanese meteorologists
working from Syowa station in Antarctica recorded their "lowest
ever" ozone reading. Measurements at research centers in
Argentina, Australia, Chile and by the National Science Foundation
of the United States, among others, showed a rise in ultraviolet
radiation and the XIth CCAMLR had expressed concern about the
adverse effects UV-B irradiance could have on the Antarctic
marine ecosystem.

(112) The Meeting agreed that this information should be made
known to the Parties of the Montreal Protocol, meeting late this
month in Copenhaghen, Denmark.

Item 15
Marine Hydrometeorological Services to Navigation in the Southern
Ocean

(113) Under this item a Working Paper (XVII ATCM/WP 18) was
provided by Russia and an Information Paper (XVII ATCM/INFO 50)
was provided by WMO.

(114) The Russian Delegation described the activities of its
country's expeditions in relation to support of shipping by
providing information on sea ice derived from satellite
observation, particularly in support of the joint United
States/Russian research program in the Weddell Sea.

(115) Other delegations described their marine weather and ice
forecasting in Antarctica.

(116) The Representative of WMO presented INFO 50 which pointed
out the increase in availability of high resolution satellite and
meteorological data in Antarctica and which noted the
vulnerability of poorly equipped ships to ice and severe weather
in the region. Support was sought from Treaty Parties in improving 
observations for the special periods during FROST (an experiment 
of SCAR aimed at assessing the capabilities of existing numerical 
weather forecasting in Antarctica).

Item 16
Co-operation in hydrographic surveying and charting of Antarctic 
waters.

(117) The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) informed 
the Meeting that, pursuant to Recommendation XV-19 of the XVth 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting it has established a 
Permanent Working Group (PWG) on co-operation in Antarctica. The 
inaugural meeting was held in Venice on the 13 November 1992, and 
was attended by representatives from several Parties as well as 
COMNAP and SCAR.

(118) A report of this meeting was presented by IHO to the XVIIth 
ATCM (XVII ATCM/INFO 64). The IHO PWG has agreed several important 
initiatives to achieve more effective cooperation in hydrographic 
surveying and charting in Antarctica. These include production of 
an annually updated report of completed and planned surveys which 
will allow better coordination and more effective disposition of 
limited hydrographic survey resources. It was also agreed to 
develop an international scheme of charts for Antarctica, which 
would reduce the degree of duplication between national 
Hydrographic Offices.
The IHO also expressed the view that it is important to continue 
close liaison with COMNAP and SCAR.

(119) The IHO believes that these initiatives are an effective 
response to the Recommendation emanating from the XVth ATCM. They 
will contribute significantly to improving safety of life at sea 
and avoiding adverse environmental impact. The IHO will continue 
to present reports to the ATCM on its activities. The IHO 
suggested a continuing role for the ATCM in ensuring the ongoing 
national funding of these activities.

(120) Several Parties emphasised the importance of this work and 
commended the IHO on its progress.

Item 17
Air Safety in Antarctica

(121) Under this item an Information Paper was presented by Chile 
( XVII ATCM/INFO 66) related to a meeting of a panel on air safety 
in the Antarctic Peninsula Region, which was held in Chile in 
October 1992, in accordance with the proposal by the SCALOP Sub-
Group on Air Safety in Antarctica.

(122) The Meeting reached consensus that in principle item 16, 
Cooperation in Hydrographic Surveying and charting of Antarctic 
waters should he addressed at the XVIIIth ATCM under the agenda 
item Operation of the Antarctic Treaty System, Reports from 
International Organizations.
It was also suggested that item 17, Air Safety in Antarctica, may 
not need to be included on the agenda of the XVIIIth ATCM.
20

Item 18
Question related to the exercise of jurisdiction in Antarctica

(123) The Meeting agreed that this question should be further
considered at the next Consultative Meeting.

Item 19
Preparation of the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting
Date and place of the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting

(124) The Meeting received with special satisfaction the
invitation of Japan to host the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting in
spring 1994. Date and venue of the above mentioned Meeting will be
notified by the Government of Japan through diplomatic channel.

(125) The Meeting acknowledged the offer put forward by the
Representative of the Republic of Korea to host the XIXth
Consultative Meeting in the year 1995.

Invitation of Iinternational and non-governmental Organizations

(126) The Meeting decided that the following International
Organization having a scientific or technical interest in
Antarctica shall be invited to designate an expert to attend the
forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it in its substantive work:

(127) The Meeting decided that any Contracting Party may
thereafter propose that an invitation be extended to other
International Organizations having a scientific or technical
interest in Antarctica to assist the Meeting in its substantive
work; each such proposal shall be submitted to the government of
Japan not later than 180 days before the beginning of the Meeting
and shall be accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for
proposal.

(128) The Meeting agreed that the host government shall transmit
these proposals to all Contracting Parties in accordance with the
procedure in paragraph 131 below. Any Consultative Party which
wishes to object to a proposal shall do so not less than 90 days
before the Meeting.

(129) Unless such an objection will be received, the Government of
Japan shall extend the invitations to International Organizations
identified in accordance with paragraph 126 and 127 and shall
request each International Organization to communicate the name of
the designated expert to the host government prior to the opening
of the Meeting. All such experts may attend the Meeting during
consideration of all items, except for those items relating to the
operation of the Antarctic Treaty System which are identified by
the previous Meeting or upon adoption of the agenda.
21

Preparation of the Agenda of the XVIIIth Consultative Meeting

(130) Italy, as host of the XVIIth ATCM has prepared a preliminary
agenda for the XVIIIth ATCM. This preliminary agenda is annexed to
the Final Report of this Meeting as Annex......

(131) The Meeting agreed that any contracting Party may propose
supplementary items for the preliminary agenda by informing the
host government for the forthcoming Consultative Meeting not later
180 days before the beginning of the Meeting; each proposal shall
be accompanied by an explanatory memorandum. The host Government
shall draw the attention of all Contracting Parties to this Rule
not later that 210 days before the Meeting.

(132) The Government of Japan shall prepare a provisional agenda
for the Consultative Meeting. The provisional agenda shall
contain:

     (a) all items on the preliminary agenda decided in accordance to
paragraph 130; and

     (b) all items the inclusion of which has been requested by a
Contracting Party pursuant to paragraph 131.

(133) Not later than 120 days before the Meeting, the Government
of Japan shall transmit to all the Contracting Parties the
provisional agenda, together with explanatory memoranda and any
other papers related thereto.

Item 21
Adoption of the report

Item 22
Closing of the Meeting
