ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                      

                                  VENICE              
                           11-20 november 1992              
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/WP 10              
11 November 1992              
Original: English              


COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION: RULES OF PROCEDURE              

Agenda Item 6.b              

(Working paper submitted by New Zealand)
AGENDA ITEM 6(B) : COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Working Paper Submitted by New Zealand

RULES OF PROCEDURE
COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION: RULES OF PROCEDURE

Precedents

While the rules of procedure of the Committee for Environmental Protection (CEP) will have to be compatible with the rules of procedure for ATCMs, the rules of procedure for the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR offer a better model. The Scientific Committee is an advisory body to the Commission, while the CEP will be an advisory body of the ATCM - although the role of the CEP extends beyond the provision of scientific advice.

Among the various matters which the rules of procedure will have to address, there are several which will be particularly important for the successful operation of the CEP.

Location and Frequency of Meetings

Meetings of the CEP should be held in the same place, and preferably immediately before, the periodic ATCM (on the assumption that ATCMs continue to be held annually). This will have the advantage of lower cost of attendance, the ATCM (since more of the same people can expect to attend both meetings), and lower Secretariat costs (whether the Secretariat functions are performed by a Contracting Party or a permanent Secretariat, if the latter is eventually established). There should, however, be provision made in the rules for it to meet in a different location, and more frequently, if circumstances require.
2

Rule 4 of the Scientific Committee's rules covers these 
points adequately, with a necessary change to the 
reference to "the Headquarters of the Commission".

Secretariat

In view of the likely workload of the CEP, and the 
increasing complexity of the Antarctic Treaty system, a 
Secretariat will be necessary to provide services for the 
CEP. A Secretariat could service both the ATCMs and the 
CEP. This will, however, mean that the establishment of a 
budget will be unavoidable, to which each Contracting 
Party will have to contribute.

Decision Making

There is no provision in the Protocol governing decision 
making by the CEP, and this must therefore be dealt with 
in the rules. The decision making regime for the 
Scientific Committee of CCAMLR is an appropriate 
precedent, bearing in mind that the CEP will report to the 
ATCM.

Under that regime, contained in rule 3, the 
recommendations and advice of the Scientific Committee are 
normally to be determined by consensus. If consensus 
cannot be reached, the report of the Scientific Committee 
to the Commission is required to reflect the differing 
views. Procedural decisions will be taken by a simple 
majority of those present and voting. Substantive 
decisions are required to be taken by consensus, as are 
decisions as to whether an issue is a matter of substance.

Reporting of Minority Views

By article 11.5 of the Protocol, the report of the CEP is 
required to cover all matters considered at the session 
and to reflect the views expressed. It would be desirable 
if the rules of the CEP spelt out this requirement in a 
little more detail, to ensure that any measure of 
dissatisfaction with a decision taken by the CEP can be 
accomodated in the language of the report, and thus 
facilitate the arrival by the Committee at an agreed 
report.

Although the CCAMLR Convention (article XVI.2) 
specifically requires that the Scientific Committee's 
rules "shall include procedures for the presentation of 
minority reports" - a provision which has no direct 
counterpart in the Protocol - the injunction in 
article 11.5 noted in the preceding paragraph provides 
adequate authority for the rules of the CEP to contain 
similar procedures as have been adopted by the Scientific 
Committee. Under rule 3, the report is required to 
contain all views advanced on an issue where no consensus
was possible. That is in fact the case even if a consensus has been achieved. Moreover, any member or 
group of members can submit views directly to the 
Commission, if they choose to do so.

Subsidiary Bodies

In view of the wide range of issues which the CEP is 
mandated to consider, it must have appropriate authority 
to establish subsidiary bodies or working groups to focus 
on particular matters if the need arises. Again, the 
practice followed by the Scientific Committee is 
instructive. It has established open-ended working groups 
in several instances, and these meet intersessionally.

The Scientific Committee's authority is contained within 
article XVI.2 of the Convention, for which there is no 
counterpart in the Protocol. It is, however, a question 
which can be dealt with in the CEP's rules, which are 
required to be approved by the ATCM. Rule 13 of the rules 
of the Scientific Committee is an appropriate model.

Involvement of NGOs

Article 11.2 of the Protocol allows the CEP, with the 
approval of the ATCM, to "invite such other relevant 
scientific, environmental and technical organisations 
which can contribute to its work to participate as 
observers at its sessions". It will be necessary to 
establish some procedure to ensure that such 
organisations, which will include non-governmental 
organisations, are advised well in advance of their 
invitation. Depending on the timing of the holding of the 
ATCM and the CEP, delay in the approval of the invitation 
to particular organisations could occur in the absence of 
such a procedure.

The procedure for the approval of invitations should be 
simple, with as few hurdles as possible. Although the 
Protocol must be respected, it is in the interest of 
transparency and of facilitating access by all appropriate 
organisations that the right of veto should only be 
exercised in accordance with clearly defined procedures, 
and that its exercise should automatically be subject to 
full discussion.

The recently amended rules for the Scientific Committee -

They both - provide a model for such a procedure. 
well in advance of the annual session, subject to the 
notification of an objection by any Member of the 
Scientific Committee, and require that any such objection 
"shall be considered at an early point during the next 
meeting of the Committee" (rule 20 - see generally rules 
19-23).
4

No qualificational restrictions should be imposed on the persons designated to represent the organisations invited to attend as observers. Unlike the case of the Scientific Committee of CCAMLR, where the representatives of the Members are required to have "suitable scientific qualifications" (article XIV.2), the Protocol makes no such requirement for the representatives of Contracting Parties. Once it has been determined that an organisation has a relevant scientific, environmental or technical character, and an invitation has been extended to it to participate as an observer, it should be over to the organisation itself to determine who is best able to represent it in the CEP.

Election of Chair

While it might in principle be preferable for the Chair to be selected on the basis of his or her qualifications and experience, taking into account as necessary the need to rotate the position among regions, there is a case to be made for the Chair to be appointed in accordance with a rotational arrangement. This might be by geographical region or alphabetically.  The vice Chair should be selected with a view to providing geographic balance and/or to ensuring some continuity in the office holders.
