ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA      ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  VENICE                        
                                  11-20 november 1992            

XVII ATCM/WP 19
12 November 1992
Original: English

ORGANISATIONAL ASPECTS - SECRETARIAT SUPPORT
FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY PARTIES

Agenda Item 7.a

(Working paper submitted by Australia)
ITEM 7(A) - ORGANISATIONAL ASPECTS

SECRETARIAT SUPPORT FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY PARTIES

(WORKING PAPER SUBMITTED BY AUSTRALIA)
SECRETARIAT SUPPORT FOR THE ANTARCTIC TREATY PARTIES

GUIDING PRINCIPLES

At ATCM XVI Parties indicated widespread support for the establishment of 
a small, modern, cost-effective Secretariat, responsible to and under the 
authority of the consultative meetings, to support the operation of the 
Antarctic Treaty consultative mechanism. Discussions should proceed from 
that point.

Any proposal for a Secretariat should not diminish the authority of the 
ATCM, or substantially change the current rotational arrangements for 
hosting ATCMs. Its functions should essentially be to provide 
administrative support on tasks agreed by Parties in relation to 
organisational and procedural matters and the circulation of information, 
notably in implementing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the 
arctic Treaty.

Functions

These should involve mechanical and administrative support and not 
concern matters of policy, or policy aspects of management. They could 
include the following:

    facilitating and co-ordinating information exchanges between the 
    Treaty Parties (including those arising under the Protocol)

    administrative support and advice to Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
    Meeting (ATCM) host in preparation for, conduct of and follow-up to 
    Treaty meetings

        translating, printing and distributing meeting documents
        preparation, publication and distribution of Final Reports of 
        Meetings

        co-ordination and circulation to parties of documents related to 
        and arising from preparatory meetings held to discuss the 
        agenda for and the invitation of observers to ATCMs

        provide advice and prepare reports, on request

    providing support for the Committee for Environmental Protection

        maintenance of records

        circulation and co-ordination of CEEs and related matters, 
        including comment received and final decisions

        other matters arising under Article 12 of the Protocol

    maintenance of the central archives of Antarctic Treaty documents 
    (including meetings, information exchange, inspection and 
    environmental reports)
publication of updates of the Antarctic Treaty Handbook

.    provision of information about the Antarctic Treaty system to third
Parties

.    co-ordination of communications with other relevant bodies

.    financial and budgetary matters.

Budget

The budget will to some extent be contingent on the functions agreed, but should reflect Parties' indicated preference for a low-cost operation. The CCAMLR Secretariat, which involves the equivalent of 12 full-time staff, and an annual budget of $AUS 1.4 million (of which members contributions are $1.13 million, with basic contributions at $AUS 52,000) might be considered as a starting point, given that it is generally considered to be an effective operation. The budget for a Treaty Secretariat would be less than for the CCAMLR Secretariat, given that the CCAMLR Secretariat meets the significant costs of hosting the annual Commission meeting and it is proposed that the Treaty Secretariat would not. The Treaty Secretariat would also need a different staffing structure.

The continuing rotation of ATCM hosting arrangements (under which the host ATP meets the cost of the Meeting) will be more cost-effective than having the Secretariat responsible for organising and funding ATCMs. This might still be regarded as part of the overall cost-sharing arrangement.

The cost of rent and maintenance for accommodation for the Secretariat should be met by the nation which, Parties agree, will host the Secretariat. The host nation should also arrange for tax-free status to the Secretariat and its staff.

Thought might be given to cost-sharing arrangements among ATCPs.

Staffing

Staffing will depend on Parties' agreement on functions and budget. The above-mentioned budget might provide for a number of staff - but less than those employed by the CCAMLR Secretariat (which involves 4 professional and the equivalent of 8 full-time support staff, including translators). They might include an Executive-Secretary or equivalent. Precise numbers and levels of staff would need to be carefully considered.

Election of the Executive-Secretary should preferably be through a simple procedure involving a consensus. Tenure should be for four years, which may be renewable for one further term of four years. In determining appointments, thought will inevitably need to be given to achieving a balance of the different interests and responsibilities of Treaty Parties under the Antarctic Treaty system.
