ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
                                    XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                 

                                    ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
                                    XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                                   VENICE       
                                                   11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 22
13 November 1992
Original: English


ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM - SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS
REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS
FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

                                    Agenda Item 11

(Working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
Draft Recommendation

ATCM XVII
11-20 November  1992
Venice

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREA SYSTEM

SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS
FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

(Working Paper submitted by the United Kingdom)

The revised Management Plans for SPAs Nos. 1-3 have been submitted by Australia.

The revised Management Plan for SPA No. 20 has been submitted by
New Zealand.
DRAFT

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO. 1
TAYLOR ROOKERY, MAC. ROBERTSON LAND

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

The area was originally designated a Specially Protected Area because it contains a
colony of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) which is one of the few, and
probably the largest, of the known colonies of this species located wholly on land.
Almost all other emperor penguin rookeries are located on sea ice. The rookery is also
important because of long-term monitoring of the population of the penguins (since
1954). The colony is ideal for counting since it is surrounded by small rocky hills which
make it possible to observe every bird without entering the breeding area. A
photographic census program has been carried out annually since 1988, and it is believed
that this method has resulted in almost complete accuracy of counting.

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
  • prevent unnecessary disturbance to the emperor penguin colony at Taylor Rookery;
    and
  • permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be undertaken
    elsewhere, while ensuring no significant disturbance to the ecosystem of the area
    including the penguin colony.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The management plan and activities in the Area should be kept under review to ensure
that the values for which the Area was designated are being fully protected. Inspection
visits may be made only when considered essential for management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-1 in November 1966, for an indefinite
period.

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

The area consists of the whole of the northernmost rock exposure on the east side
of Taylor Glacier, Mac. Robertson Land (67°26'S; 60°50'E). The rookery is
located on a low lying rock outcrop in the south-west corner of a bay formed by
Taylor Glacier to the west, the polar ice cap to the south and the islands of the
Colbeck Archipelago to the east. The Area is surrounded by sea ice to the north
and east. The area is some 90 kilometres west of Mawson station. There is ice-
free terrain adjacent to the glacier on the western boundary and to the south the rock
rises steeply to meet the ice of the plateau. The rock itself forms a horseshoe
around a central flat area of exposed rock and moraine. This area is covered with
snow in winter and is occupied by the emperor penguins. The compressed snow
melts in summer to form a shallow lake and stream which exits to the north-east.
The sides of the horseshoe are rounded ridges of rock which are bare and
smoothed by ice. Otherwise the terrain is rough and dissected with cracks and
fissures. The average height of the ridges is about 30 metres. The area also has a
raised beach which is typical of several found along the coast of Mac. Robertson
. 
16
Land. The beach is composed of locally derived pebbles, cobbles and boulders between 1 cm and 1 m across. It slopes upwards from the shoreline to a well defined platform several metres broad and 3 to 6 m above sea level.

There are no boundary markers since the Area is easily defined by its natural features.

(b) Access to the Area:

Access to the Area is only in accordance with a permit or authority issued by a contracting party or its authorised representative.

Restrictions apply to the mode of transport to and within the Area, and access points are prescribed; see Section 8(a).

(c) Location of structures including scientific stations, research and refuge facilities both within and near the Area:

There are no structures within the Area and no permanent structures are permitted.
A four-berth refuge is located in the Colbeck Archipelago, approximately 5 kilometres to the north-east of the area (see Map B). Mawson Station (67°36'S, 62°53'E) is approximately 90 kilometres to the east.

(d) Location of other protected areas in or near the Area:

The Rookery Islands (Specially Protected Area No. 2) are located some 80 kilometres to the east of Taylor Rookery (see Map A).

6. IDENTIFICATION OF RESTRICTED ZONES

Access to the Emperor penguin colony, marked on Map C, is prohibited unless authorised in a permit.

7. MAPS OF THE AREA

Map A shows the location of the Area in relation to the Mawson region; Map B shows the location of the field hut on the Colbeck Archipelago, and access routes to the Area; and Map C shows the Area in greater detail, including the usual location of the penguin colony, and the area where all activity such as landing helicopters and installing field huts or field camps should take place, where permitted.

8. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED

Criteria for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
• it is issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be undertaken elsewhere;
• the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system existing in the Area; and
• the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan for the Area.

Conditions applying:

(a) Access to and movement within the Area:

    i. Wherever possible, access should be from the sea ice to the east of Colbeck Archipelago, to avoid disturbance to the birds by crossing their pathways from the rookery to the sea (see Map B). Persons in the vicinity, not approaching the colony, should also be aware of the penguins' pathways, and take care to cause as little disturbance to them as possible.

   ii. Travel to the Area may be by oversnow vehicle, which is generally only possible during the period 1 May to 25 December, or by helicopter. Vehicle entry to the Area is prohibited. Oversnow vehicles used for transport to the 
17
Area are to be left outside the Area, to the east, and entry must be by foot.
The approach route for vehicles is marked on Map B.

iii.  Helicopters are not permitted to land in the Area unless sea ice conditions 
outside the Area are such that it would be hazardous for aircraft to land on ice 
or for personnel to walk on it. If sea ice conditions are not suitable, 
helicopters are authorised to land in the Area, to the north-east, where a 
headland to the south obscures the colony from view (see Map C). Map B 
shows the helicopter access route.

iv.  The following conditions apply to the use of helicopters:
      - helicopters are to approach the Area from the east over the sea ice and, where sea ice conditions permit, land outside the Area, with access being 
        by foot (see Map B);
      - overflight of the rookery is prohibited;
      - when landing outside the Area, helicopters should not land, take off or fly 
        within 500 metres of the rookery;
      - if landing inside the Area is essential due to sea ice conditions, helicopters 
        should land in the north-east of the Area, where a headland to the south 
        obscures the colony from view (see Map C);
      - helicopters approaching to land in the Area must fly as low as possible 
        over the sea ice to avoid disturbing the colony; and
      - helicopters are not to be refuelled within the Area.

v.   There are no marked pedestrian routes within the Area; pedestrians should 
     keep well away from the penguins, unless disturbance to the penguins is 
     authorised by permit. Movement in and around the Area should be such that, 
     in general, the routes used by the birds are not crossed.

vi.  Dogs are not to be used for transport to the Area.

(b) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including restrictions 
on time and place:

i.   The penguins are particularly sensitive to disturbance during the following 
     periods:
     - when they are incubating eggs, from mid-May to mid-July; and
     - from mid-July, when feeding chicks to mid-December, when the chicks 
       fledge. However, penguins are known to be present at the rookery during 
       every month except February, when no recorded expeditions to the 
       rookery have been made; restrictions therefore apply year-round.

ii.  The emperor penguin colony is ideal for counting. Normally the best 
     vantage point for viewing and photographing the penguins is a rocky 
     headland which runs adjacent to Taylor Glacier, on the western side of the 
     rookery. The ideal time for a census is from 22 June to 5 July, since during 
     this time only incubating males are present, each representing one breeding 
     pair. An ongoing photographic census program has been carried out since 
     1988.

iii. Other activities which may be conducted in the Area:
     - compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken elsewhere and 
       which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the Area; and
     - compelling management activities, which if not carried out would 
       jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.

(c) The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

No structures are to be installed in the Area unless essential for scientific purposes; 
any structure installed should be removed when it is no longer required. Only the 
minimum number of personnel necessary to install and to remove the structure
should be used. Field huts if permitted, should be placed well away from the penguin colony, to the north-east of the Area, where a headland to the south obscures the colony from view (see Map C).

(d) The location of field camps:

See (c) above.

(e) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area:

    i. No poultry products, including dried food products such as soup or egg powder, are to be taken into the Area.

   ii. No depots of food or other supplies are to be left within the Area beyond the season for which they are required.

  iii. Fuel is not to be depoted in the Area, unless required by a visitor for personal use, ie for cooking/heating in a field hut, and is to be removed when no longer required.

(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

    i. Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is prohibited unless specifically authorised by permit issued in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, or Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, whichever is appropriate.

   ii. All research must be carried out in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct on Ethics of Animal Experimentation in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder:

There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for scientific or management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met:

    i. Permits should specify the maximum number of people allowed entry at any one time.

   ii. Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the research and management objectives.

  iii. Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove structures or equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing authority detailing the activities undertaken within the Area including a summary of research findings, and comments indicating measures taken to ensure compliance with conditions. Where appropriate, the report may make recommendations relevant to the management of the Area, in particular, as to whether the values for which the Area was designated are being adequately protected. The report should be submitted as soon as practicable after the visit to the Area has been completed.

19
TAYLOR ROOKERY
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No1
Emperor Penguin Colony

ROOKERY ISLANDS
SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA No2
Colonies of six bird species


MAP 'A'

                          62°E                                 
0cm                     Taylor             
Bay                     Glacier                          
                        Jelbart             
                        Glacier                          
                        Cape Simpson         
                        Ure I.               
Stibbs                  Colbeck Arch         
Bay                                          
                        Low Tongue           
                        Forbes               
                        Glacier                          
                        Casey Range          
                        David Range          
                        Holme Bay            
                        Mawson               
                        Australia            
                        67°40'S              
                        Moss?on Range        

          0     5      10     15     20
         KILOMETRES


MAP 'B'

                       61°E                  
                       main penguin pathways
                       COLBECK              
                       ARCHIPELAGO          
                       Colbeck Hut          
                       Byrd Head            
                       helicopter approach route
                       vehicle approach route
                       Norris I.            
                       Tschuffert Peak      
                       Stump Mt             
                       Chappell Ridge       
Taylor                 Taylor               
Glacier                Rookery              
                       Glacier              

          0    0.5     1      1.5    2
         KILOMETRES

20
MAP 'C'

                      60°53' E

SEA ICE

Emperor penguin 
pathways to the sea

Site for Apple hut,
Headland to the south
obscures the colony
from view.

Helicopter landing site
with low altitude entry
from the east.

Taylor

Glacier

MELT 
LAKE

Eastern edge of glacier

Traditional winter
Colony Site

SEA ICE

0     50    100   150   200
METRES

-48- Contours in metres
58.3 Spot height in metres

21
DRAFT

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO 2
ROOKERY ISLANDS, HOLME BAY, MAC. ROBERTSON LAND

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED
The Rookery Islands contain breeding colonies of six bird species resident in the
Mawson area; Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), Cape petrel (Daption capensis), snow
petrel (Pagodroma nivea), southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus), Wilson's storm
petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) and the Antarctic skua (Catharacta maccormicki). The
southern giant petrel breeds nowhere else in the region. The designation of the Area
aims to safeguard this unusual association of six species and ensure the preservation of a
sample offshore island habitat.

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
  • maintain a reference area unmodified by human interference;
  • permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be undertaken
    elsewhere, while ensuring no significant disturbance to the ecosystem of the Area and
    maintaining the status of the SPA as a reference area; and
  • ensure that the breeding colony of southern giant petrels, which is close to the point
    of local extinction, is not endangered by human impacts.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The management plan and activities in the Area should be kept under review to ensure
that the values for which the Area was designated are being fully protected. Inspection
visits may be made only when considered essential for management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-1 in November 1966 for an indefinite
period.

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

Rookery Islands are a group of small islands and rocks in the south-western part of
Holme Bay, Mac. Robertson Land, approximately 10 kilometres to the west of the
Australian station, Mawson. The Area comprises the islands and rocks lying
within the rectangle marked on the map (see Section 7), the general location of
which is latitude 67°37'S, longitude 62°33'E. There are no boundary markers
delimiting the site.

There are approximately 75 small islands. They range in size from small rocks
which barely remain above water at high tide to the largest members of the group
which are Giganteus Island (approximately 400 m long, 400 m wide and 30 m
high) and Rookery Island which is of similar area but slightly more elongated.
Raised beaches are evident on Giganteus Island.

22
The Rookery Islands are outcrops of the Mawson Charnockite a rock type which is 
found over an area of at least 2000 km² along the Mawson coast of Mac.Robertson 
Land.

There are terrestrial algae, as yet unidentified, but no known mosses or lichens. 
There are no freshwater bodies on the Rookery Islands.

(b) Access to the Area:

Access to the Area is only in accordance with a current permit issued by a 
contracting party or its authorised representative.

No access points are prescribed. Restrictions apply to the mode of transport and to 
the proximity of access points to breeding colonies; for these refer to Section (8).

(c) Location of structures including scientific stations, research and refuge facilities 
both within and near the Area:

There are no structures within the Area. Mawson Station (67°36'S, 62°53'E) is 
approximately 10 kilometres to the east.

(d) Location of other protected areas in or near the Area:

Taylor Rookery (Specially Protected Area No. 1) is approximately 80 kilometres 
west of the islands at latitude 67°26'S, longitude 60°50'E.

6. IDENTIFICATION OF RESTRICTED ZONES

Access to Giganteus Island is prohibited except where a permit specifies otherwise. See 
8(a)(vi) below.

7. MAPS OF THE AREA

Map A shows the location of the Rookery Islands in the Mawson area, and Map B is a 
more detailed map of the Area.

8. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED

Criteria for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
• it is issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be undertaken elsewhere;
• the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system existing in the 
Area; and
• the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan for the Area.

Conditions applying:

(a) Access to and movement within the Area:

    i. Travel may be by oversnow vehicle from around 20 November for between 
       four and six weeks (allowing for seasonal variations in sea ice conditions). 
       Visitors must ensure that vehicles are taken no closer than 200 metres from 
       concentrations of birds and that they are always left at the shoreline.

   ii. As helicopter access may at times be the only viable means of reaching the 
       islands, and as the islands are small in size, aircraft may land within 500 
       metres of breeding colonies. Permission to land a helicopter may be granted 
       for essential scientific purposes only if it can be demonstrated that 
       disturbance will be minimal.

  iii. No refuelling within the Area.

   iv. Overflight of the islands is prohibited except where essential for scientific 
       purposes. Such overflight is to be at an altitude of no less than 500 metres.

23
v. Dogs are not to be used for transport within the Area.

vi. Access to Giganteus Island is prohibited except for the purpose of monitoring the southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus). As the breeding colony is close to the point of local extinction and the birds are easily disturbed, the number of persons granted entry for this purpose must be strictly limited and include an experienced ornithologist.

(b) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including restrictions on time and place:

    i. Compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere.
    ii. Compelling management activities, which if not carried out would jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.

(c) The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

No structures, including field huts, are to be installed in the Area unless essential for scientific purposes; any structure installed should be removed when no longer required. Only the minimum number of personnel necessary to install and remove the structure should be used.

(d) The location of field camps:

See (c) above.

(e) Restrictions on material and organisms which may be brought into the Area:

    i. Fuel is not to be depoted in the Area, unless required by a researcher for personal use, ie for cooking/heating in a field hut, and is to be removed when no longer required.

   ii. Poultry products including dried food products such as soup and egg powder are prohibited.

   iii. No food or other supplies should be left within the Area beyond the season for which they are required.

(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

    i. Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna is prohibited unless specifically authorised by permit in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, or Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, whichever is appropriate.

   ii. All research must be carried out in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct on Ethics of Animal Experimentation in Antarctica, as a minimum standard.

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder:

There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for scientific or management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

24
(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan can continue to be met:

    i. Permits should specify the maximum numbers of personnel who may enter 
       the Area.

   ii. Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve 
       research and management objectives.

  iii. Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove structures or 
       equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing authority detailing the 
activities undertaken within the Area including a summary of research findings, 
and comments indicating measures taken to ensure compliance with conditions. 
Where appropriate, the report may make recommendations relevant to the 
management of the Area, in particular, as to whether the values for which the Area 
was designated are being adequately protected. The report should be submitted as 
soon as practicable after the visit to the Area has been completed.

                                                                            25
DRAFT

MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO 3
ARDERY ISLAND AND ODBERT ISLAND, BUDD COAST

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Ardery and Odbert Islands support several breeding species of petrel and provide a sample of their habitat. There is no other readily accessible place in eastern Antarctica where the four genera of fulmarine petrels (Thalassoica antarctica, Fulmarus glacialoides, Daption capensis and Pagodroma nivea) breed in the same place in sufficient numbers to allow comparative study. Study of these four genera at the one location is of high ecological importance both from the point of view of understanding and of monitoring the Southern Ocean ecosystem. It is believed that Ardery Island is unique insofar as it is the only area in the Antarctic which harbours two different subspecies of snow petrels. Studies on morphological or ecological differences between these two subspecies are not possible anywhere else. In addition both islands have breeding populations of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites oceanicus) and Antarctic skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) and Odbert Island supports breeding populations of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae).

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
  • prevent unnecessary disturbance to the colonies of petrels on Ardery and Odbert islands; and
  • permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be undertaken elsewhere, while ensuring this has no significant impact on the ecosystem in that area.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Management Plan and activities in the Area should be kept under review to ensure that the values for which the Area was designated are being fully protected. Inspection visits may be made only when considered essential for management purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-3 in November 1966 for an indefinite period.

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

Ardery Island (66°22'S, 110°28'E) and Odbert Island (66°22'S, 110°33'E) form part of the Windmill Islands group lying in the east of Vincennes Bay, off the Budd Coast (see Map A). They are located 5 km and 0.6 km respectively to the west of Robinson Ridge, south of Casey Station. Odbert Island is approximately 2.5 km long and 0.5 km wide. It has a rocky coast which rises steeply from the sea to a plateau. The highest point is 100 m above sea level. The plateau is dissected by a series of valleys which run to the south from the high flat rim on the northern side. These valleys are snow-covered in winter. The hill tops remain essentially ice and snow free. In some years the island remains joined to Robinson Ridge on the mainland by sea ice. Ardery Island is a steep ice free island approximately 1 km 

26
long and 0.5 km wide, with an east-west orientation. The highest point is 113 m 
above mean sea level.

The terrain on both islands is rugged and dissected by fissures. The cliffs are 
fractured and have many narrow exposed ledges which in summer are occupied by 
nesting sea birds. On the hillsides and plateau region, the exposed rock is ice-
smoothed and the valley floors are covered with moraine. Both islands have 
several small tarns which are frozen in winter and filled with melt water in summer. 
Many of these are ephemeral and dry out towards the end of summer. Others 
which are located below snow banks, are fed continuously by melt water.

(b) Access to the Area:

Access to the Area may only be in accordance with a permit or authority issued by a 
contracting party or its authorised representative.

Defined landing sites for access by sea and helicopter to Ardery and Odbert Islands 
are shown on Maps B and C respectively. On Ardery Island the preferred boat 
landing site is at Robertson Landing where there are three rock anchors present to 
tie down a boat or other equipment. It should be noted that all three boat landing 
sites marked on Map B are within 200 metres of colonies of birds, however they 
represent the only safe landing sites on the Island and if landings are undertaken 
carefully there is no disturbance to the birds.

There are no defined pedestrian routes within the Area, however pedestrians should 
avoid disturbance of the birds at all times.

(c) Location of structures including scientific stations, research and refuge facilities 
both within and near the Area:

There are no structures within the Area and no permanent structures are permitted.

The islands lie approximately 12 kilometres south of Casey Station.

A four-berth refuge hut is located on Robinson's Ridge, 0.5 km from the shore.

(d) Location of other protected areas in or near the Area:

North-East Bailey Peninsula (66°17'S, 110°32'E) (Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No 16) and Clark Peninsula (66°15'S, 110°36'E) (Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No 17) lie opposite the Windmill Islands (see Map A).

6. IDENTIFICATION OF RESTRICTED ZONES

Access to the petrel and Adélie penguin colonies marked on Maps B and C is prohibited 
unless authorised in a permit.

7. MAPS OF THE AREA

Three maps of the Area are attached. Map A shows the Area and its location. Map B 
(Ardery Island) and Map C (Odbert Island) show preferred helicopter approaches and 
landing sites, landing sites for access by water and the location of the petrel and Adélie 
breeding colonies.

8. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED

Criteria for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
• it is issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be undertaken elsewhere;
• the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system existing in the 
Area; and
• the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan for the Area. 
27
Conditions applying:

(a) Access to and movement within the Area:

    i. Travel to the islands should be by foot, oversnow vehicle or boat where 
possible; oversnow vehicles used to visit the islands must be left at the 
shoreline and movement within the Area should be by foot.

   ii. If access to the islands is not possible by sea or over sea-ice then helicopters 
may be used subject to the following conditions:
        • overflight of the islands should be avoided at all times, except where it 
is considered essential for scientific purposes. In these instances 
overflight must be at an altitude or horizontal distance of no less than 
500 metres;
        • during the breeding season of penguins and petrels, defined here as the 
period from 1 November to 1 April, helicopter movement to the islands 
should be kept to the minimum;
        • refuelling is not to take place within the Area;
        • only personnel who are required to carry out work in the Area should 
leave the helicopter;
        • the approach to Ardery Island should be at a high altitude and from a 
southern direction as the lowest densities of birds are on the southern 
cliffs (see Map B);
        • the approach to Odbert Island should preferably be from the south, 
avoiding cliff areas because of the nesting petrels (see Map C).

(b) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including res:rictions 
on time and place.

    i. Compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere.

   ii. Compelling management activities, which if not carried out would 
jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.

  iii. Where activities necessitate interference with the birds care should be taken 
to cause the least possible disturbance, particularly during the period 1 
November to 1 April.

(c) The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

No structures may be erected in the Area unless essential for research purposes. 
Any structures installed on the islands must be removed when no longer required. 
Installation of a field hut on Ardery Island should take place wherever possible 
before 1 November when the breeding season commences and removal should be 
after 1 April when the fledglings have departed. Installation and removal should be 
by oversnow transport unless sea-ice conditions prevent this. For use of 
helicopters see (a) ii above.

(d) The location of field camps:

If required for field work a hut may be erected on Ardery Island at the point 
specified on Map B. There are 8 solid rock anchors available at this spot.

(e) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area:

    i. Fuel is not to be depoted on the islands, unless required by a researcher for 
personal use, ie for cooking/heating etc, in a field hut on Ardery Island, and 
is to be removed at the same time as the hut.

   ii. No poultry products, including dried food products such as soup or egg 
powder, are to be taken into the Area.

28
(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

i. Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna is prohibited unless specifically authorised by permit issued in accordance with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, or Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, whichever is appropriate.

ii. All research must be carried out in accordance with the SCAR Code of Conduct on Ethics of Animal Experimentation in Antarctica, as a minimum.

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder:

There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for scientific or management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met:

i. Permits should specify the maximum number of people allowed entry at any one time.

ii. Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the research and management objectives.

iii. Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove structures or equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing authority detailing the activities undertaken within the Area including a summary of research findings, and comments indicating measures taken to ensure compliance with conditions. Where appropriate, the report may make recommendations relevant to the management of the Area, in particular, as to whether the values for which the Area was designated are being adequately protected. The report should be submitted as soon as practicable after the visit to the Area has been completed.

 
                  29
30


MAP 'B'


ARDERY
ISLAND


preferred direction
of approach for
helicapters


LEGEND


1 Recommended landing:
Robertson Landing


2 Cave Landing


3 Penney Landing


4 Recommended location
for Apple Hut - B rock
cochera present. The
northermost is marked
by a cairn of stones


petrel colonies


 Best helicopter landing for
general purposes, but landing
anywhere in the flat central
areas of Ardery Island is
possible


3 rock anchors
(for eg boat)


Ardery Island as seen when approaching from the north
(Numbers refer to those in map above)


MAP 'C'


ODBERT
ISLAND


preferred direction
of approach for
helicapters


LEGEND


petrel colonies


Adelie rookeries


Prefered helicopter landing site
DRAFT

                  Annex 8

Specially Protected Area (SPA) No 20
"New College Valley", Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island

1.  Geographical location
The site is in latitude 77°14'S, longitude 166°23'E, in the northern part of the Cape Bird
ice-free area. It lies between Northern Rookery and Middle Rookery and is about 250 m
south of the summer research station.

2.  Management plan

(i)  Description of area

Topography
The area consists of the generally west-facing ice-free slopes lying between the cliff top
above Caughley Beach and a line parallel to and about 100 m east of the edge of the Mount
Bird Ice Cap, and between a line south of the main stream bed of "Keble Valley" and the
south ridge of "New College Valley". It is surrounded to the north, south and east by Site
of Special Scientific Interest No 10 and to the west terminates at the cliff tops above
Caughley Beach. Its total area is about 10 ha.

The ground is largely covered by stones and boulders of volcanic origin which have been
reworked by glacial action. There are a few glacial erratic boulders of different origin.

The major feature of the site is "New College Valley" which has been cut by the vigorous
flows of meltwater received from the Mount Bird Ice Cap during summer. Tributaries to
this stream and two other smaller streams in the area are fed by melt from persistent
summer snowdrifts and have eroded their own shallow gullies and channels.

Biological features
A general descrioption of the vegetation is provided by Broady (1984, 1989) as part of a
broad survey of vegetation at Cape Bird and two other ice-free areas on Ross Island.
Longton (1973, 1974) classified the bryophyte community at Caughley Beach as the
Bryum antarcticum Sociatioin in which B. antarcticum is dominant with occasional B.
argenteum. It is not clear from the information presented whether the site examined was
actually inside the SPA but, if not, it was certainly very close. Sketch maps of moss and
algae stands within the SPA are provided by Broady (1984).

Stream vegetation includes luxuriant red-brown oscillatoriacean (Cyanobacteria) mats, rich
epilithic green filaments and crusts of chlorophyte algae, and colonies of Nostoc
(Cyanobacteria).

The more or less north west-facing slopes of the main valley and smaller gullies support
extensive moss stands as scattered small cushions and as confluent growths up to several
square metres in extent (total cover >200 m2). Often the plants and surrounding soil
become covered with a white mineral encrustation if meltwater supply ceases during the
summer and vegetation and soils dessicate. The maximum development of moss is found
along the borders of shallow channels taking meltwater from snow drifts. Also scattered
cushions no more than 5 cm diameter are found on moist ground where melt percolations
31
are not channelled but seep broadly over the surface. Bryophyte biomass at Caughley 
Beach (Longton, 1974) was estimated as 14 and 938 g dry weight per square metre for two 
stands, with 1.4% and 84.7% cover respectively.

The mosses are generally associated with abundant red-brown oscillatoriacean mats and 
occasionally with colonies of Nostoc. Other areas of soaked ground are dominated by 
either Nostoc colonies (approximately 100 m^(2)) or oscillatoriacean mats (approximately 200 
m^(2)).

Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest on the beach below the cliffs to the west of the site 
and frequently overfly and land within the SPA. Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) from 
large nearby rookeries occasionally traverse the area. Nutrient enrichment of soils occurs 
from deposited guano as well as from windblown particulates from the large penguin 
rookeries to the north and south.

(ii) Reason for designation

The area contains some of the most luxuriant stands on Ross Island of moss and algae 
vegetation and associated microflora and microfauna. Because of the susceptibility of this 
vegetation to damage from trampling, the designation of the area provides protection for its 
biota, so that the area may serve as a conservation reserve representative of the adjacent Site 
of Special Scientific Interest.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

The site was established by ATCM Recommendation XIII-12 following its proposal to 
SCAR by New Zealand in October 1984.

(iv) Access points

The site can be accessed only by passing through the adjacent SSSI. It is best reached by a 
route directly south-east from the summer research station to the north. Care should be 
taken to avoid any areas of vegetation along the way.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry to the area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection (but see 
"Inspection and maintenance" below), and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the 
natural ecosystem or its biota within the area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be 
included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic 
season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is forbidden to:

(a)    drive any vehicle within the Area;
(b)    land a helicopter within the Area;
(c)    overfly the Area by an aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(d)    incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human and human waste within 
       the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(e)    leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area;
(f)    erect any form of building within the Area;
(g)    use any sampling or other equipment within the Area which has not been sterilized 
       using an acceptable method.

32
(vii) Pedestrian routes

Every precaution must be taken to keep clear of visible vegetation and also waterlogged ground, whether this has visible vegetation or not. During summer all these areas are easily damaged by trampling. Saturated ground, especially where situated on sloping terrain, is very prone to slip when traversed by foot and the making of deep footprints would be unavoidable. Routes should be taken which pass upslope of persistent summer snow drifts, especially during times of thaw. In this way saturated ground would be most easily avoided.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area. Only for exceptional purposes would sampling of vegetation be permitted as there are similar areas of vegetation in the adjacent SSSI, as well as outside the designated areas to the south of the site.

Persons permitted to enter the site should take all reasonable precautions to avoid introducing plants and micro-organisms from elsewhere. All sampling apparatus should be sterilized before use and boots should be thoroughly cleaned before entry.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made once every year to assess the state of the site and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. However, entry to the site is not necessary for these visits as its state can be readily viewed from the surrounding SSSI. Also, as the site is small and contains rich terrestrial moss and algal vegetation, on site inspection visits could themselves cause damage.

3. Bibliography

BROADY, P A. 1984. The vegetation of Cape Bird, Ross Island, Antarctica. Melbourne University Programme in Antarctic Studies, Report No 62, 42 pp, 15 tables, 140 figs.

BROADY, P A. 1989 Broadscale patterns in the distribution of aquatic and terrestrial vegetation at three ice-free regions on Ross Island, Antarctica. Hydrobiologia, 172: 77-95.

LONGTON, R E. 1973. A classification of terrestrial vegetation near McMurdo Sound, continental Antarctica. Canadian Journal of Botany, 51: 2339-46.

LONGTON, R E. 1974. Microclimate and biomass in communities of the Bryum association on Ross Island, continental Antarctica. The Bryologist, 77: 109-22.

[Postscript: It is intended to place signs close to the boundaries of this site and to choose boundaries which more closely follow natural features. The latter requires a more detailed map than presently available. Action on both of these will be taken this coming summer.]

33
34


                                                  
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    

