WP14.

SEVENTEENTH ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

Working Paper Submitted by Australia

ITEM 13 - TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
ITEM 13:  CONDUCT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN 
ANTARCTICA

Approach

Australian Government Departments and agencies have undertaken a review of 
the matters raised in ATCM XVI-13, having particular regard to the adequacy 
of existing Treaty regulations, their implementation and the application of 
the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to tourism 
and non-governmental activity in Antarctica.

Australia considers there is no requirement for additional regulations at 
this stage, but that there is a need to provide guidance to tourist 
operators and non-governmental organisations which will assist them in 
meeting the present obligations under the Treaty system. Australia also 
sees a need to establish arrangements for determining which Party should 
take responsibility for overseeing tourism and non-governmental activity 
and to outline procedures for organisers to provide notification of 
activities.

The following draft Recommendation, submitted for consideration by Parties, 
sets out a practical arrangement for achieving the requirements identified 
above.
DRAFT RECOMMENDATION ON THE CONDUCT OF TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITY IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

The Representatives,

Noting the continued increase in tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Concerned that this activity has the potential to have adverse impact on the Antarctic environment and its dependent and associate ecosystems, and has the potential to disrupt scientific research;

Mindful of Articles IV, VII(5) and X, of the Antarctic Treaty;

Recalling Recommendations IV-27, VI-7, VII-4, VIII-9, X-8 and XVI-13;

Conscious that the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes apply to all activities in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Recognising the need to ensure that the provisions of the Treaty, associated measures and the Protocol can be effectively and uniformly applied to the conduct of tourism and non-governmental activity in the Antarctic Treaty area;

Recognising the desirability of establishing a clear synthesis of the Treaty requirements which apply to the organisers of tourism and non-governmental activity and which clarifies the responsibility of Parties for overseeing organisers and which improves notification requirements for organisers;

Recommend to their Governments that they adopt the following provisions for the conduct of tourism and non-governmental activity in Antarctica:

1.  Parties adopt the attached Statement of Relevant Principles and Provisions for the Conduct of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activity in the Antarctic Treaty area (Appendix A). Each Party shall draw the Statement to the attention of organisers of tourism and other non-governmental activities (including operators of such activities and independent visitors) and request that they comply with it.

2.  For the purposes of overseeing an activity, primary responsibility shall be assumed by the Treaty Party in whose territory the expedition is organised. This shall include communication of obligations under the Treaty and its associated measures, including the Protocol and its Annexes, approval of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), subsequent follow-up action and reporting an activity may be assumed by another Party, following consultation and agreement, if appropriate, with the Party in whose territory the activity is being organised.

3.  If an activity (including an expedition) is organised in the territory of a nation which is not a Treaty Party, responsibility for overseeing the activity shall be assumed by one of the Parties, in order of priority:
(a)	the Party from whose territory the expedition will proceed to 
Antarctica, or

(b)	the Party under whose flag the vessel or craft transporting the 
expedition will travel, or

(c)	a Party whose nationals are included among the visitors taking 
part in the expedition, or

(d)	a Party whose station or base the expedition proposes to visit.

If the activity has no such links with a Party, Parties shall consult to 
determine arrangements for overseeing the activity.

4.	Each Party shall give early advance notice to other Parties of all 
activities organised within its territory and of all activities notified to 
it by an organiser, or for which it has assumed responsibility. Parties 
shall inform other Parties who may be affected of any significant 
modification of any proposed activity.

5.	Each Party shall inform, at the earliest opportunity, all organisers 
of an activity which it is responsible for overseeing, of their obligations 
and responsibilities under the Treaty and its associated measures, as set 
out in the attached Statement. Parties will provide copies of those 
documents upon request.

6.	Parties shall promptly assess information received from organisers, 
such as EIAs and waste management plans, prior to the proposed activity 
commencing. Each Party shall inform Parties who may be affected, of any 
determinations it has made in respect of the environmental impact of the 
proposed activity and of any procedures it may have put in place to assess 
and verify the impact of the activity.

7.	A Party whose station an organiser proposes to visit shall, after 
receiving reasonable assurances that the proposed visit is in accordance 
with the Treaty and associated measures, determine under what conditions 
access to its facilities may be granted and promptly inform the organiser. 
Where reasonable assurances are not forthcoming, a Party may refuse access 
to its facilities, in which case it shall promptly advise other Parties 
that may be affected.

8.	The Party whose station an organiser proposes to visit may have 
direct contact with the organiser on the conditions for such a visit, but 
should inform the Party, which has assumed primary responsibility for 
overseeing the organiser of the outcome of such communications.

9.	Parties shall report annually to other Parties on the details of 
visits by their nationals or on other tourist and non-governmental 
activities which have been notified to them in accordance with these 
Provisions.
APPENDIX A

STATEMENT OF RELEVANT PRINCIPLES AND PROVISIONS
NON-GOVERNMENTAL ACTIVITIES IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

1. Organisers of tourism and non-governmental activities, including 
operators of such activities and independent visitors, should inform 
themselves of and comply with the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and 
its associated measures, and the Protocol on Environmental Protection to 
the Antarctic Treaty and its Annexes. While this Statement reflects 
obligations deriving from the Treaty and its associated measures, and the 
Protocol and its Annexes, organisers should also refer to any national 
legislation which may implement these instruments. Organisers may request 
Parties to provide a copy of the Treaty and associated measures and the 
Protocol and its Annexes.

2. Organisers should take appropriate steps to ensure that all visitors, 
for which they are responsible, understand and comply with the provisions 
of the Antarctic Treaty and its associated measures, and the Protocol and 
its Annexes.

Advance Notice by Organisers of Tourism and Non-Government Activities

3. Organisers should provide advance notice of the details of their 
proposed activity to the Party in whose territory the activity is being 
organised.

4. If the activity is being organised in the territory of a non-Party, 
such notice should be given to one of the following, in order of priority, 
to:

a. the Party from whose territory the expedition will proceed for 
    Antarctica; or

b. the Party under whose flag the vessel or craft transporting the 
    expedition will travel; or

c. a Party whose nationals are participating in the expedition; or

d. a Party whose station or base the expedition proposes to visit.

5. Advance notice is required to be provided as soon as possible and, if 
practicable, should be provided at least 12 months before commencement of 
the activity.

6. Information required in the advance notice should include:

a. details of the name and nationality of any vessel or craft to be 
    used;

b. intended itinerary including dates of departure and places to be 
    visited;
c.     activities to be undertaken;

d.     number of visitors to be carried;

e.     intended use of aircraft; and

f.     name, nationality and contact details of organiser.

7.     The Party to which advance notice has been given or which has 
otherwise been agreed by Parties, shall assume primary responsibility for 
overseeing an activity.

8.     At least 3 months in advance of the proposed visit, organisers are 
required to provide notice to any Party whose station or base they propose 
to visit with a view to obtaining permission. Parties will advise 
organisers of their decision and any conditions which may be attached to 
permission to visit in order to ensure safety or to safeguard scientific 
programs.

                                   Planning of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

9.     Following contact with the Party having primary responsibility for 
overseeing the activity, all organisers shall prepare or cooperate in the 
preparation of an environmental impact assessment (EIA), that may be 
required in accordance with the Annex I of the Protocol, before undertaking 
any proposed activity. The proposed activity shall not commence until the 
EIA has been considered, modified if appropriate, and approved by the Party 
which has primary responsibility for overseeing the proposed activity in 
accordance with Annex I of the Protocol. The EIA shall be completed in 
accordance with that Party's national procedures. The EIA must also 
indicate how the activity will be monitored to ensure impacts are not 
significantly greater or different than predicted.

10.    Organisers should provide all information and undertake any actions 
required by the Party which has primary responsibility for overseeing the 
activity in the preparation or implementation of:

       a.     contingency response plans relevant to any incidents with potential 
              to cause adverse impacts on the Antarctic environment, in accordance 
              with Article 15 of the Protocol;

       b.     a waste management plan, in accordance with Annex III of the 
              Protocol; and

       c.     marine pollution contingency plans that appropriately consider any 
              incidents which have the potential to cause adverse impacts on the 
              Antarctic environment, in accordance with Annex IV of the Protocol.

11.    Any application by an organiser for a permit to enter protected areas 
should be, as far as possible, directed to the Party with primary 
responsibility for overseeing the activity.

12.    To ensure all organisers are familiar with and comply with the 
appropriate communications, air traffic control and emergency procedures 
they should consult with the Party which has primary responsibility for 
overseeing the activity. Advance notice of aircraft flight plans should be 
provided in accordance with the Treaty and associated measures and the 
Protocol and its Annexes.
13. Organisers should ensure their activity is fully self-sufficient and does not require any logistical assistance from Parties for which arrangements have not been agreed in advance.

14. Except where sponsored by a Treaty Party, organisers should arrange appropriate insurance cover against the risk of incurring financial charges or material losses in the Treaty area.

Conduct of Tourism and Non-Governmental Activities

15. Organisers are required to comply with any requirements or conditions identified by the Party which has primary responsibility for overseeing the activity and any conditions or restrictions stipulated by the Party whose station they propose to visit, or the commander of that station, including conditions relevant to visitors' safety or to safeguard scientific programs being undertaken at or near the station, in accordance with the Treaty and associated measures and the Protocol and its Annexes.

16. Organisers and visitors, where appropriate, should:

    a. provide final confirmation to the station or base they intend to visit between 24 and 72 hours before their arrival;

    b. ensure that all visitors are properly supervised by suitable guides and that such guides have adequate experience of, or training in, Antarctic conditions and knowledge of the provisions of the Antarctic Treaty and its associated measures for protection of the environment, and the Protocol and its Annexes;

    c. as far as practicable, monitor their environmental impacts and provide written notification, to the Party with primary responsibility for overseeing the activity, of any unforeseen or adverse impacts resulting from an activity that were not addressed by their EIA and of any cumulative impacts on an area which come to their attention;

    d. operate aircraft in accordance with appropriate procedures set down by Treaty Parties in the Antarctic Flight Information Manual. Such procedures include communications, air traffic control and emergency procedures while in the Treaty area;

    e. comply with conditions on permits for entry to protected areas and abide by all requirements of the management plan for such areas;

    f. respect historic sites and monuments; and

    g. cooperate with any inspections and monitoring, including of any ships, aircraft and equipment, undertaken in accordance with Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty.

Reporting

17. At the conclusion of a visit to Antarctica, organisers should report on the conduct of their activities to the Party which has primary responsibility for overseeing the activity. Such a report should provide, as appropriate, details of the name and nationality of each vessel or aircraft used and the name of their captain, itinerary, the number of
visitors engaged in the activity, places and dates of landings and the 
number of visitors landed on each occasion. The report should also include 
details of any significant changes in activities from those proposed before 
the visit was conducted. Reports should be provided not later than the 
thirtieth of July following the completion of the activities.

Cases of Emergency

18. This Statement shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the 
safety of human life or of ships, aircraft or equipment and facilities of 
high value, or the protection of the environment.

19. Organisers should inform the Party which has primary responsibility 
for overseeing the activity, as soon as possible, of any actions which they 
may have taken in cases of emergency.

Visitor Education

20. Organisers should ensure that all visitors under their control are 
provided with a copy of the Code of Conduct for Visitors to the Antarctic 
and are informed about how safety and other requirements, such as waste 
disposal and protection of fauna and flora, will be complied with during 
their activities.
