ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE              
                              11-20 november 1992              

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
лого?о? о? а?тар?т?ке              
XVII K[?]HC[?]T[?]THBOE COBE?IAHHE              

XVII ATCM/WP 6              
9 November 1992              
Original: English              


ANTARCTIC TOURISM AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL              

Agenda Item 13              

(Submitted by the United States of America)
ANTARCTIC TOURISM AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL

The United States delegation approaches the issue of Antarctic tourism on the basis of United States commitment to the comprehensive protection of the Antarctic environment. Like other Parties to the Antarctic Treaty, the United States has formally accepted that commitment in adopting and signing the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

It is the United States view that consideration of the need for additional action with respect to tourist activities in Antarctica at this or future Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings should proceed from a clear understanding of how the provisions of the new Protocol relate to tourist activities in Antarctica. With the objective of contributing to such understanding, the United States delegation has prepared an analysis (which is attached) of the application of the Protocol to tourism.

First, the analysis indicates that the Protocol would be required to take measures within its competence to ensure compliance by all tourist expeditions to Antarctica involving its ships and aircraft or nationals, as well as all expeditions to Antarctica organized or proceeding from its territory with the following provisions:

  o Article 3 - which sets forth general environmental protection principles;

  o Article 7 - which prohibits mineral resource activities;

  o Article 8 - which sets forth general environmental impact assessment requirements (which are elaborated in Annex I);

  o Article 15 - which sets forth requirements for response action to environmental emergencies;

  o Annex I - which sets forth detailed procedures for the prior assessment of the environmental impacts of proposed activities in Antarctica; and

  o Annex III - which sets forth detailed requirements relating to the generation and disposal of wastes in the Antarctic Treaty area.
- 2 -

Second, the analysis indicates that each Party to the 
Protocol would be required to take measures within its 
competence to ensure compliance by all individuals present in 
Antarctica, which would include tourists, with the following 
provisions:

  o   Annex II - which sets forth detailed rules to protect 
      native species of birds, mammals and plants; and

  o   Annex V - which provides for a system of protected 
      areas in Antarctica (Antarctic Specially Protected Areas 
      and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas).

Third, the analysis indicates that each Party to the 
Protocol would be required to take measures within its 
competence to ensure compliance with the provisions of Annex 
IV (prevention of marine pollution) by all ships entitled to 
fly its flag and all ships engaged in or supporting its 
Antarctic operations, while operating in the Antarctic Treaty 
area. This would include any such ship undertaking tourist 
activities or carrying tourists on board.

 
- 2 -
ANTARCTIC TOURISM AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL PROTOCOL

Analysis

Background - The Protocol

The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties adopted and opened for signature the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, with four annexes, on October 4, 1991, in Madrid. The Protocol builds upon the Antarctic Treaty to extend and improve the Treaty's effectiveness as a mechanism for ensuring the protection of the Antarctic environment.

The Protocol designates Antarctica as a natural reserve, devoted to peace and science, and sets forth environmental protection principles applicable to human activities in Antarctica that will be binding under international law. These include obligations to accord priority to scientific research and a prohibition of Antarctic mineral resource activities. The Protocol is intended to replace existing Treaty recommendations addressing the protection of the Antarctic environment, including the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. It does not affect other treaties in force in the Antarctic Treaty area, including the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals.

More detailed mandatory rules for environmental protection are incorporated in a system of annexes that forms an integral part of the Protocol. Specific annexes on environmental impact assessment, conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, waste disposal and waste management, and the prevention of marine pollution were adopted with the Protocol. A fifth annex on area protection and management was adopted subsequently by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties. The Protocol establishes a Committee for Environmental Protection to provide advice and recommendations to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings on the implementation of the Protocol.

The Protocol incorporates provisions to ensure effective compliance with its requirements, including compulsory and binding procedures for settlement of disputes relating to mineral resource activities, environmental impact assessment and emergency response action, as well as over the detailed rules included in the annexes.
- 2 -

Application to Tourism of the Articles of the Protocol

In addition to the prohibition on activities relating to 
Antarctic mineral resources (referred to above), the Protocol 
itself sets forth a number of general obligations relating to 
activities in Antarctica, some of which are further elaborated 
in the specific provisions of the Annexes. These general 
obligations are contained in:

  o Article 3 - which sets forth general environmental 
    protection principles;

  o Article 7 - which prohibits mineral resource activities;

  o Article 8 - which sets forth general environmental 
    impact assessment requirements (which are elaborated in 
    Annex I);

  o Article 15 - which sets forth requirements for response 
    action to environmental emergencies.

The Parties to the Protocol are required to apply the 
obligations contained in each of these articles to "activities 
undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific 
research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and 
non-governmental activities for which advance notice is 
required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic 
Treaty, including associated logistic support activities."

Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty requires each 
Party to give advance notice to all other Parties of the 
following governmental and non-governmental activities:

    (a) all expeditions to and within Antarctica, on the part 
        of its ships and aircraft or nationals, and all 
        expeditions to Antarctica organized or proceeding from its 
        territory;

    (b) all stations in Antarctica occupied by its nationals; 
        and

    (c) any military personnel or equipment intended to be 
        introduced by it into Antarctica (subject to the peaceful 
        purposes conditions of Article I of the Antarctic Treaty).

- 2 -
06-11-1992 12:09      uEETE ROME 4TH FL L         39+6+4674+2663

- 3 -

Application to Tourism of the Annexes to the Protocol

The Protocol (Article 9) provides for the adoption and entry into effect of annexes in which more specific and detailed measures and rules for environmental protection are to be incorporated and can be reviewed and amended in a timely and effective fashion. The annexes form an integral part of the Protocol. Annexes I - IV, containing provisions on environmental impact assessment, conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora, waste disposal and waste management and prevention of marine pollution, respectively, were concluded concurrently with the Protocol itself.

Annexes, additional to Annexes I - IV, may be adopted and become effective in accordance with Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty. (Article IX provides for measures to be adopted by consensus of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties and to become effective when the Depositary has been notified of their approval by all such Parties.) An additional annex - Annex V on Area Protection and Management - has already been adopted by Recommendation XVI-10 of the Sixteenth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, held in Bonn, October 7-18, 1991.

Annex I: Annex I sets forth the detailed rules for environmental impact assessment. Its procedures require preparation of an Initial Environmental Evaluation (IEE) for any proposed activity projected as having at least a minor or transitory impact upon the environment. The IEE is to be prepared in sufficient detail to indicate whether the proposed activity will have more than such a minor or transitory impact. If so, preparation of a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation of the proposed activity is required.

Annex I applies to "activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and non-governmental activities for which advance notice is required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support activities."

Annex II: Annex II sets forth detailed rules on the conservation of Antarctic fauna and flora. It prohibits the taking of any native mammal or bird or native plant, or the harmful interference therewith, except in accordance with a permit. Taking means to kill, injure, capture, handle or molest a mammal or bird, or to remove or damage such

- 3 -
quantities of native plants as to significantly affect their
local distribution or abundance. Harmful interference refers
to activities that disturb concentrations of mammals or birds,
that significantly damage concentrations of native terrestrial
plants or any activity that results in significant adverse
habitat modification.

Permits for taking or harmful interference may be issued
only to provide specimens for scientific purposes, to provide
specimens for museums, zoos or other educational or cultural
institutions, or to provide for unavoidable consequences of
other scientific activities or the construction and operation
of scientific support facilities.

Thus, the Annex would prohibit tourists from taking or
willfully disturbing native mammals or birds, walking on or
otherwise damaging concentrations of native terrestrial
plants, or carrying out any activity that results in
significant modification of the habitat of any species or
population of native mammal, bird, plant or invertebrate.

No species of non-native animal or plant may be introduced
into the Antarctic Treaty area except in accordance with a
permit. Such permits may be issued only for domestic plants
and laboratory animals and plants, including viruses,
bacteria, yeast and fungi, and only in a manner that poses no
risk to native fauna and flora, with requirements for removal
from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposal by incineration or
equally effective means prior to the expiration of the
permit. The annex further prohibits importation of dogs into
the Antarctic Treaty area and requires all dogs currently in
the area to be removed by April 1, 1994.

The provisions on introduction of non-native species are
not to apply to importation of food, provided that no live
animals are so imported and provided that all plants and
animal parts, imported as food, are kept in carefully
controlled conditions. Special precautions are required for
poultry to prevent introduction of diseases, including removal
from the Antarctic Treaty area or disposal by incineration or
equivalent means of any imported poultry that is not consumed
as food. The importation of non-sterile soil is to be avoided
to the maximum extent practicable.

The provisions on the introduction of non-native species
apply to all individuals, including tourists, present in
Antarctica.

- 4 -
- 5 -

Annex III: Annex III sets forth detailed requirements 
relating to the generation and disposal of wastes in the 
Antarctic Treaty area. It identifies wastes that must be 
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, including radio-active 
materials; electrical batteries; fuel, both liquid and solid; 
wastes, containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely 
toxic or harmful persistent compounds; poly-vinyl chloride, 
polyurethane foam, polystyrene foam, rubber and lubricating 
oils, treated timbers and other products that could produce 
harmful emissions if incinerated; and all other plastic wastes 
(except for low density polyethylene containers which are to 
be incinerated).

Fuel drums and other solid, non-combustible wastes must 
also be removed, unless such removal would result in greater 
adverse environmental impact than leaving them in place.  All 
other liquid wastes, including sewage and other domestic 
liquid wastes, are to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty 
area to the maximum extent practicable.

No wastes that may be disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty 
area may be disposed of onto ice-free terrestrial areas or 
into fresh water systems. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 
non-sterile soil, polystyrene beads, chips or similar forms of 
packaging, and pesticides (other than those required for 
scientific, medical or hygiene purposes) may not be introduced 
onto land or ice shelves or into water in the Antarctic Treaty 
area.

Annex III applies to "activities undertaken in the 
Antarctic Treaty area pursuant to scientific research 
programmes, tourism and all other governmental and 
non-governmental activities for which advance notice is 
required in accordance with Article VII (5) of the Antarctic 
Treaty, including associated logistic support activities."

Annex IV: Annex IV on the prevention of marine pollution 
obligates each Party to apply strict controls on ships 
entitled to fly its flag and to any other ship engaged in or 
supporting its Antarctic operations, while operating in the 
Antarctic Treaty area. This includes any such ship 
undertaking tourist activities or carrying tourists on board.

Annex IV is designed to accord Antarctic waters at least 
the maximum degree of protection afforded by the International

- 5 -
- 6 -

Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973,
as amended by the Protocol of 1978 relating thereto, (MARPOL
73/78), including pursuant to special area designation under
Annex I (oil), Annex II (noxious liquid substances) and Annex
V (plastics and garbage) of MARPOL 73/78.

The Annex prohibits the discharge into the sea from ships
of oil or oily mixtures; any noxious liquid substance, and any
other chemical or other substances, in quantities or
concentrations that are harmful to the marine environment; all
plastics, including but not limited to synthetic ropes,
synthetic fishing nets and plastic garbage bags; and all
other garbage, including paper products, rags, glass, metal,
bottles, crockery, incineration ash, dunnage, lining and
packing materials.

Disposal into the sea of food wastes is permitted when
such wastes have been passed through a comminuter or grinder,
provided that such disposal be made as far as practicable from
land and ice shelves, but in any case not less than 12
nautical miles therefrom. With respect to sewage, except
where it would unduly impair Antarctic operations, the Parties
agree to eliminate the discharge of untreated sewage into the
sea from ships within 12 nautical miles of land or ice
shelves. Beyond 12 nautical miles, sewage stored in a holding
tank may be discharged, but not instantaneously, at a moderate
rate and, where practicable, while the ship is en route at a
speed of no less that 4 knots. These provisions on sewage do
not apply to ships certified to carry not more than ten
persons.

Each Party is to ensure that all ships entitled to fly its
flag and any other ship engaged in or supporting its Antarctic
operations, before entering the Antarctic Treaty area are so
fitted as to have capacity for retaining on board all sludge,
dirty ballast, tank washing water and other oily residues and
mixtures, and garbage while operating in the Antarctic Treaty
area; and have concluded arrangements to discharge such oily
residues and garbage at a reception facility after leaving the
Antarctic Treaty area.

Annex IV includes a provision on sovereign immunity that
exempts from its application any warship, naval auxiliary or
other ship owned or operated by a State and used, for the time
being, only on government non-commercial service.

- 6 -
- 7 -

Annex V: Annex V provides for the designation of two 
categories of protected area: Antarctic Specially Protected 
Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas.

Any area, including any marine area, may be designated as 
an Antarctic Specially Protected Area to protect outstanding 
environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic or wilderness 
values, any combination of those values, or ongoing or planned 
scientific research. Detailed management plans are required 
for each Antarctic Specially Protected Area and entry into 
such areas is prohibited except in accordance with a permit . 
Permits shall specify in detail activities authorized, by 
whom, where and when; as well as any other conditions imposed 
by the management plan. Specially Protected Areas and Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest designated by past Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meetings are to be redesignated as 
Antarctic Specially Protected Areas.

The Annex would prohibit tourists from entering Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas, unless tourist visits are 
specifically provided for in the Agreed Management Plan for 
the Area. It would allow designation of areas Antarctic 
Specially Protected Areas to ensure that research, related 
support operations, or other activities do not damage or 
destroy areas of special historic, aesthetic, or wilderness 
value.

Any area, including any marine area, where activities are 
being conducted, may be designated as an Antarctic Specially 
Managed Area to assist in the planning and coordination of 
activities, avoid possible conflicts, improve cooperation 
between Parties or minimize environmental impacts. Such areas 
may include areas where activities pose risks of mutual 
interference or cumulative environmental impacts and sites or 
monuments of recognized historic value. Management plans are 
required for each Antarctic Specially Managed Area, though 
entry into such areas does not require a permit.

The provisions of management plans for Antarctic Specially 
Managed Areas apply to all individuals, including tourists, 
present in Antarctica. Antarctic Specially Managed Areas 
could be established to regulate tourist activities and 
activities related to research and logistic support operations 
so as to avoid or minimize possible interference and conflicts 
in high-use areas.

The Annex would also require that each Party take steps to 
ensure that all persons visiting or proposing to visit 
Antarctica be informed of the locations of Antarctic Specially 
Protected Areas and Antarctic Specially Managed Areas and the 
special provisions applying in those areas.

- 7 -
- 8 -

Compliance

The Protocol obligates the Parties to take appropriate measures within their competence, including the adoption of laws and regulations, administrative actions and enforcement measures, to ensure compliance with the Protocol (including its annexes). Each Party is required to notify all other Parties of the measures it takes to ensure compliance with the Protocol.

The measures to ensure compliance with the Protocol and its Annexes include compliance with those provisions applicable to tourism identified above.

Each Party is to draw the attention of all other Parties to any activity which in its opinion affects the implementation of the Protocol and to exert appropriate efforts, consistent with the United Nations Charter, to the end that no one engages in any activity contrary to the Protocol. Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings are to draw the attention of any State which is not a Party to the Protocol to any activity undertaken by that State or those subject to its jurisdiction that affects the implementation of the Protocol.

The reference to any activity which could affect the implementation of the Protocol clearly includes tourism.
