ANTARCTIC TREATY                                          TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                              XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
                                                          
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                                  ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                             XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                           VENICE                           
                           11-20 november 1992               

XVII ATCM/WP 25
16 November 1992
original: French

EXAMINATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS

Agenda Item 7.c
(submitted by Belgium)
EXAMINATION OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS (7. C)

At present the large number  of Recommandations at our disposal 
requires a certain degree of rationalization.
The Handbook of the Antarctic Treaty System is an important means 
to meet this requirement.
Similarly, there are many documents of this kind in Spanish.
Indeed, they are unofficial documents, but no objection can be 
raised upon them as they refer to the whole set of Recommendations 
adopted so far.
In this respect, what is needed is a set of official 
Recommandations with contents and draft to be approved by the 
Consultative Parties Meeting.
Moreover, some Recommendations have become obsolete ( e.g. 
Recommendations mentioned in the list drawn up by China ad Uruguay 
in Bonn, namely Recommendations I-XV; the second Consultative 
Meeting, II-V: symposium on logistic problem, II-VIII: 
International year of the quiet sun, and so on...) 
However, these are minor Recommendations which do not entail 
serious problems.

2. However, the enforcement of the Protocol and its Annexes will 
modify the present situation, since it will influence the contents 
of existing Recommendations.

- the contents of some Recommendations will be replaced by the 
provisions of its Annexes (e.g. Recommendations III-VIII: agreed 
measures replaced by Annex II to the Protocol; Recommendation XV-4 
replaced by Annex IV to the Protocol);

- the contents of some Recommendations will be modified by the 
provisions of its Annexes (e.g. Recommendations concerning 
exchanges of information would include new information required by 
the Protocol);

- some Recommendations shall be modified in order to be included 
within the new system defined by the Protocol (e.g. present 
Recommendations concerning special statute areas will have to be 
adapted as from Annex V).

3. In this context, two working methods are advisable:

- Either selecting only Recommedations which will be still 
significant after the enforcement of the Protocol

- Or drawing up a list of Recommendations the contents of which 
will be modified by the enforcement of the Protocol, being more 
precise:

1
- when these Recommendations are partly or totally replaced be the Protocol;

- when the contents of these Recommendations must be adapted to the requests of the Protocol (e.g. in case of exchanges of information);

- when these Recommendations must be replaced by new Recommendations taking the requests of the Protocol into consideration (e.g. the system of special status areas).

Given the complex and comprehensive character of the existing system, the second method may be preferable and it should be followed by the drafters of the two sets of Recommendations.

● In this way, concrete proposals allowing the States to take all the necessary measures could be at our disposal at the next Consultative Meeting.

●
 
2
