ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE   
                                  VENICE               
                                  11-20 november 1992 
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ          
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ 

XVII ATCM/WP 12               
10 November 1992              
Original: Spanish              

BACKGROUND INFORMATION TO DRAW UP MEASURES 
TO AVOID POLLUTION OF THE SOUTHERN OCEAN   
FROM NON-ANTARCTIC TREATY AREAS             
                                             
Agenda Item 9                               
                                             
(Submitted by Chile)
XVII ATCM/WP
(Chile)

Background information to draw up measures 
to avoid pollution of the Southern Ocean 
from non-Antarctic Treaty Areas

(Agenda item 9)

I.      Introduction

Since the beginning of large scale fishing activities 
in the Southern Ocean, high quantities of waste have been 
dumped by ships of the numerous fleets that were and are 
still active in the area. Waste included objects of 
synthetic and plastic materials.

Evidence of this was found along the coast of many 
Antarctic islands where remains of these objects were 
detected. For instance, some orange buoys were spotted along 
the northern coast of most of the South Shetland Islands 
(Torres' personal observation) during aerial surveys above 
the area, which aimed at taking a census of marine mammals 
in 1965-66 (Aguayo and Torres, 1967).

Subsequently, when studies on rookeries of 
Arctocephalus gazella were carried out in 1980-81 at Cape 
Shirreff (62° 27' S, 60° 47' W), Livingston Island, litter 
was found along most of the beaches on the Island (Torres' 
personal observation). The collection of waste started not 
before 1984-85 and continued in 1987-88 and 1990-91. All the 
collected material was transported to Santiago de Chile, 
where it was classified in order to identify its possible 
origin through its trademark.

The experts focused their attention on the variety of 
plastic objects and synthetic fibres detected. The latter 
in particular, covered 91% of the 1346 records compiled in 
the three above-mentioned campaigns. Similarly, the 
presence of plastic joints was observed in 1987-88 and 1990-
91.

In order to have a reference point in view of future 
collections, waste was classified in the following groups: 
plastic, glass, metal, wrapping and synthetic materials 
which were weighted and graphed.

1
The analysis showed that materials came from Japan,
Russia, Germany, Great Britain, Poland, Argentina, Norway,
China and Brasil.

II.    Discussion

Although samples were collected only during three non
consecutive Antarctic campaigns, remains tend to increase in
time. Of course, regular collections will be necessary so as
to statistically analyse data to obtain more reliable
results.

Even though this is a summary resulting from the
analysis of materials, conclusions are very similar to those
drawn by Greenpeace (1991) in its report on litter collected
on Byers Peninsula (northern coast), Livingston Island.

Besides the aesthetic impact, some synthetic fibres
are already causing modifications and damage to the local
fauna. Evidence of this is the presence of collars in young
A. gazella, remains of the above-mentioned fibres used by
Larus dominicanus in building their nests and cables found
in some nests of Pygoscelis antarctica (Torres and Jorquera,
1992). Significantly, the first report on plastic neck
collars on A. gazella was made by Payne (1979) who observed
them in animals of South Georgia. This information was then
confirmed by Bonner and McCann (1982) who observed similar
cases  in the same area.

With reference to these problems, there is widespread
agreement with Benninghoff and Bonner's belief (1984) that
plastic waste may have long-term deleterious consequences
for marine life, such as the ingestion of plastic particles
by seabirds. All this has been confirmed by Randall and
others (1985) at subantarctic latitudes.

However, another problem stemming from this kind of
pollution is to be taken into consideration. Dr H. Burton
(Antarctic Division, Australia) reported the discovery of
plastic fragments 1 to 5 mm thick in the faeces of fur seals
on Heard Island. Dr H. Burton believes that these animals
eat sea-surface fish which, in turn, had eaten plastic
fragments (Group of Specialists on Seals, 1992 ).

The presence of such a high variety of plastic remains
on Cape Shirreff, for instance, implies that they come from
the different fishing areas in the Southern Ocean (FAO's 48,
58 and 88). Nevertheless, waste dumped into South Atlantic
fishing areas probably adds to that of the neighbouring
2
Southern Ocean. This hypothesis is partially supported by 
the fact that the action of marine currents links the 
Southern Ocean ecosystem to its connected ecosystems.

The joint action of the Current of the West Wind Drift, wind action and movement of floating ice trapping 
these remains and transporting them to distant places where 
they are left during the ice-melting season plays a 
fundamental role. Furthermore, the detection of five South 
African drift bottles (one on the Chiloe Island and four on 
Cape Shirreff) showing the patterns of marine currents 
further supports the above-mentioned hypothesis (Torres, 
1992).

Recomendations on environmental protection approved 
by the Antarctic Treaty System and the Madrid Protocol 
(although not enforced yet) are an important step forward in 
the Parties' commitment to reduce the environmental impact 
of pollution including that which may be caused by fishing 
boats and ships for logistic support and tourism. 
Nevertheless, the litter discharged into the sea before the 
enforcement of these measures has not been disposed of yet. 
The situation is considered a potential danger which does 
not only cause problems to marine life but eventually may 
also affect human health, since some ropes 80 cm to 40 m 
long were found (Torres' personal observation) and may get 
trapped around the helm and the propellers of ships, as has 
already occurred.

III.  Suggestions

On the basis of this background information and 
considering the actions for environmental protection 
promoted by the Antarctic Treaty System, the following 
recomendations are advisable:

1) The Parties involved in the System are to take 
action in order to strengthen MARPOL 73/78 and the 
Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by the 
Dumping of Wastes and other Matter (Dumping Convention, 
London 1972). Moreover, they are to urge other nations 
involved in fishing, logistic or other activities in and 
nearby the Antarctic Treaty Area to sign, ratify and enforce 
the above-mentioned conventions.

2) A system of monitoring is to be set up , wherever 
possible, in the Antarctic area to assess if the problem of 
waste dumping into the sea is continuing, increasing or 
decreasing. This activity is to include not only the 
collection of litter, but also the record of seabirds and 
                                                  3
marine mammals caught in the meshes of nets and other damage 
caused by litter to Antarctic marine life.

 
∙
∙
 
4
IV. Bibliography

Aguayo L., A. y D. Torres, 1967. Observaciones sobre mamiferos 
marinos durante la Vigésima Expedición Antártica Chilena.
Primer censo de pinipedos en las islas Shetland del Sur. Rev.
Biol. Mar., Valparaíso 13(1):1-57.

Benninghoff, W.S. y W.N. Bonner, 1984. Man's impact in the 
Antarctic Environment. SCAR-ICSU, Scott Polar Research 
Institute. Cambridg, 56 págs.

Bonner, W.N. y T.S. McCann, 1982. Neck collars on fur seals 
Arctocephalus gazella, at South Georgia. Br. Antarct. Surv.
Bull. 57:73-77.

Greenpeace, 1991. Report of litter found on Byers Peninsula,
Livingston Island. 1 April 1991. 7 págs. (No publicado).

Group of Specialist on Seals, 1992. Report of the Meeting of the 
SCAR Group of Specialist on Seals. ICSU-SCAR. XXII SCAR,
Bariloche, 8-12 June 1992, Argentina. 84 págs.

Payne, M.R., 1979. Fur seals Arctocephalus tropicalis and A.
gazella crossing the Antarctic Convergence at South 
Georgia.Mammalia 43:93-98.

Randall, B.M., R.M. Randall y G.J. Rossow, 1983. Plastic particle 
pollution in great shearwaters (Puffinus gravis)
from Gough Island. S. Afr. J. Antarct. Res. 13:49-50.

Torres, D., 1992. Synthesis of the study on environmental impact 
in Cape Shirreff, Livingston Island. En: International 
Symposium: Science in Antarctica. Organized by Universidad de 
Chile, National Science Foundation and Universidad de 
Magallanes. Punta Arenas, 12-16 April, 1992, Chile. 9 págs.

Torres, D. y D. Jorquera, 1992. Análisis de desechos hallados en 
cabo Shirreff, isla Livingston, Shetland del Sur, Antártica.
Docto. CCAMLR (Chile). Hobart, Australia, 1992.

5
