ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING              
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE              
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                          

                                  VENICE               
                                  11-20 november 1992               

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA              
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ              
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ              

XVII ATCM/WP 17              
11 November 1992              
Original: Spanish              

ISSUES RELATING TO THE EXERCISE OF              
JURISDICTION IN ANTARCTICA              

Agenda Item 18              

(Submitted by Uruguay)
XVII ATCM/WP
(Uruguay)

ISSUES RELATING TO THE EXERCISE OF
JURISDICTION IN ANTARCTICA

(Agenda Item 18)

I) Statement of the problem

Article VIII of the Antarctic Treaty establishes that:
"in order to facilitate the exercise of their functions
under the present Treaty, and without prejudice to the
respective positions of the Contracting Parties relating to
jurisdiction over all other persons in Antarctica,
observers designated under paragraph 1 of Article VII and
scientific personnel exchanged under sub-paragraph 1 (b)
of Article III of the Treaty, and members of staffs
accompanying any such persons, shall be subject only to
the jurisdiction of the Contracting Parties of which they
are nationals in respect of all acts or omissions occurring
while they are in Antarctica for the purpose of exercising
their functions" (Paragraph 1).

Article VIII also establishes that: "Without prejudice
to the provisions of paragraph 1 of this Article, and
pending the adoption of measures in pursuance of sub-
paragraph 1 (e) of Article IX, the Contracting Parties
concerned in any case of dispute with regard to the exercise
of jurisdiction in Antarctica, shall immediately consult
together with a view to reaching a mutually acceptable
solution" (Paragraph 2).

Art. IX subparagraph 1 e) establishes that "questions
relating to the exercise of jurisdiction in Antarctica" are
to be included in Recommendations presented during
Consultative Meetings. This shows that, when the Treaty was
drawn up, the Contracting Parties were already aware of the
need to further develop the issue of jurisdiction.

The various increasing activities of member States in
Antarctica involving people from different countries, the
presence and activity of people from non-member States or
not connected to activities carried out by member States in
the area have recently emphasized the need to draw up, even
though in a very simple way, regulations with reference to
jurisdiction.

Indeed, in accordance with existing embryonic
regulations and given the new situation, it is increasingly
1
important to lay down complementary rules in the field of 
jurisdiction over people, facilities and resources in 
Antarctica. Otherwise, people may be responsible for actions 
or omissions on other people or facilities in Antarctica 
without being subject to any type of jurisdiction. This 
would entail negative consequences and high risks for the 
development and success of the increasingly complex 
Antarctic Treaty System.

Uruguayan representatives in Artigas Scientific Base 
have repeatedly stressed the need for more detailed general 
rules in the field of jurisdiction. This need is 
particularly urgent given the increasing number of people 
hosted in Scientific Bases, for different reasons and in 
various circumstances, with special reference to the so-
called "accidental tourists or scientists" who are generally 
not subject to the jurisdiction of the member States and may 
give rise to serious practical problems.

Issues related to "Tourism and non-governamental 
activities" also have juridical implications and therefore 
deserve special attention.

An accident occured in January 1992 at Bellinghausen 
Russian Base, on King George Island, which caused the death 
of a Russian representative and involved a member of the 
Uruguayan Base reiterated the importance of the problem and 
the need to analyse it within the Antarctic Treaty System.

Consequently, a study on this issue is advisable. It is 
basically aimed at laying down new rules for unanimous 
implementation by the Treaty member States. These mesures 
would prevent Parties tackling urgent matters from 
regulating or implementing criteria hampering the fulfilment 
of objectives and principles of the Antarctic Treaty and the 
deriving System.

In particular the regulation of situations with neither 
juridical nor practical solutions is requested, especially 
when persons or facilities of the Treaty member States are 
affected by acts or omissions of non-member States' 
nationals, or of member States' nationals acting 
independently from their own countries. All this will not 
modify the respective positions of the Contracting Parties.

II ) Analisys of existing regulations and the need for their 
completion.

First of all, Article VIII of the Antarctic Treaty 
states that "observers designated under paragraph 1 of 
Article VII and scientific personnel exchanged under sub-
paragraph 1 (b) of Article III of the Treaty and members of
                                                               2
staffs accompanying any such persons, shall be subject only 
to the jurisdiction of the Contracting Party of which they 
are nationals in respect of all acts or omissions occurring 
while they are in Antarctica for the purpose of exercising 
their functions".

        Consequently, no concrete decision has been taken upon 
the following issues:

        a) The submission to the jurisdiction of the 
Contracting Party, of which they are nationals, of 
facilities, scientific experts and other persons sent by the 
Party to the Antarctic Treaty area (for instance authorities 
or other visitors) within the range of activities carried 
out by the Party in compliance with the Treaty , with 
reference to acts or omissions of these persons while in the 
Antarctic area.

        b) The submission to the jurisdiction of the 
Contracting Party of facilities, scientific experts and 
other persons who are neither nationals of this Party nor 
of any Contracting Party and are sent to the Antarctic Treaty 
area within the range of activities carried out by the 
member States in compliance with the Treaty, with reference 
to acts or omissions of these persons while in the Antarctic 
area.

        c) The submission to the jurisdiction of the 
Contracting Party of persons who are not nationals of any 
Contracting Party, who have not been included in the above-
mentioned regulations and who are responsible for acts or 
omissions affecting this Contracting Party, persons or 
facilities subject to their jurisdiction in the Antarctic 
Treaty area.

        So far, the hypothesis presented in point a) has been 
interpreted and solved by member States on the basis of 
paragraph 1 of Article VIII of the Treaty. This practise has 
been accepted during the whole period of enforcement of the 
Treaty.

        However, the more recent hypotheses presented in points 
b) and c) give rise to more problems in their interpretation 
and solution. The consultative procedure envisaged by the 
already quoted paragraph 2 of Article VIII, which does not 
jeopardize the finding of solutions, seems to be unsuitable 
for the enforcement of the necessary urgent measures.

        The regulation of the above-mentioned hypotheses is 
deemed to be in compliance with the objective set in Article 
VIII to facilitate the "exercise of functions" attributed by 
the Treaty to the Contracting Parties and without prejudice
        3
to "their respective positions...relating to jurisdiction 
over all other persons in Antarctica".

    The Treaty itself underscored that the regulations 
referring to jurisdiction were to be completed in the 
future. Indeed, the Treaty proved once again far-sighted in 
emphasizing in point e) of paragraph 1 of Article IX that 
one of the duties of the Consultative Meetings was solving 
questions relating to the exercise of jurisdiction in 
Antarctica. It also indicated one of the points requiring 
further analysis taking the future development and 
complexity of activities in the area into consideration.

 
                                                                    
4
