ANTARCTIC TREATY                
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING        
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE           
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      
                                  VENICE       
                                  11-20 november 1992
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO                 
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA           
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ             
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ    

                                  XVII ATCM/WP 24/Rev. 2
                                  17 November 1992
                                  Original: English

                                  
ATCM RULES OF PROCEDURE           
AGENDA FOR CONSULTATIVE MEETINGS  
                                  
Agenda Item 7.e                     
(Working paper submitted by the United Kingdom)
Insert new rules after Rule 34 as follows:

"Agenda for Consultative Meetings

35   At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the host 
     government of that Meeting shall prepare a 
     preliminary agenda for the next Consultative Meeting. 
     If approved by the meeting, the preliminary agenda for 
     the next Meeting shall be annexed to the final report 
     of the Meeting.

36   Any contracting Party may propose supplementary items 
     for the preliminary agenda by informing the host 
     government for the forthcoming Consultative Meeting no 
     later 180 days before the beginning of the 
     Meeting; each proposal shall be accompanied by an 
     explanatory memorandum. The host government shall draw 
     the attention of all Contracting Parties to this Rule 
     not later than 210 days before the Meeting.

37   The host government shall prepare a provisional agenda 
     for the Consultative Meeting. The provisional agenda 
     shall contain:

     (a)    all items on the preliminary agenda decided in 
            accordance with Rule 35; and

     (b)   all items the inclusion of which has been requested 
            by a Contracting Party pursuant to Rule 36.

     Not later than 120 days before the meeting, the host 
     government shall transmit to all the Contracting 
     Parties the provisional agenda, together with 
     explanatory memoranda and any other papers related 
     thereto.

Experts from international organisations

38   At the end of each Consultative Meeting, the Meeting 
     shall decide which international organisations having a 
     scientific or technical interst in Antarctica shall be 
     invited to designate an expert to attend the 
     forthcoming Meeting in order to assist it in its 
     substantive work.

39.  Any Contracting Party may thereafter propose that an 
     invitation be extended to other international 
     organisations having a scientific or technical interest 
     in Antarctica to assist the Meeting in its substantive 
     work; each such proposal shall be submitted to the host 
     government for that Meeting not later than 180 
     days before the beginning of the Meeting and shall be
accompanied by a memorandum setting out the basis for 
the proposal.

40. The host government shall transmit these proposals to 
all Contracting Parties in accordance with the 
procedure in Rule 37. Any Consultative Party which 
wishes to object to a proposal shall do so not less 
than 90 days before the Meeting.

41. Unless such an objection has been received, the host 
government shall extend invitations to international 
organisations identified in accordance with Rules 38 
and 39 and shall request each international 
organisation to communicate the name of the designated 
expert to the host government prior to the opening of 
the Meeting. All such experts may attend the Meeting 
during consideration of all items, except for those 
items relating to the operation of the Antarctic Treaty 
System which are identified by the previous Meeting or 
upon adoption of the agenda."

Rule 35 shall be deleted.

Rules 36-39 of the existing Rules shall be renumbered 
accordingly.

Rule 39 shall be amended as follows:

For "35" read "38-41"
For "37" read "43"

In Rule 6, replace the reference to Rule 3 by a reference to 
Rule 4.

In Rule 14, replace the reference to Rule 26 by a reference 
to Rule 27.
