ANTARCTIC TREATY              
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING      
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE       
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE      

                  VENICE           
           11-20 november 1992       

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO              
XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA        
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ         
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ  

XVII ATCM/WP 1 
9 November 1992  
Original: French  

PRELIMINARY DRAFT  

ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO  
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY  

REGULATION CONCERNING TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL  
ACTIVITIES  

Agenda Item 13  
(Submitted by Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Spain)
PRELIMINARY DRAFT.

ANNEX VI TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY

REGULATION CONCERNING TOURISM AND NON-GOVERNMENTAL
ACTIVITIES

( Chile, France, Germany, Italy, Spain)
Legal, political and practical reasons make it necessary 
for the Parties to the Antarctic Treaty to adopt an Annex to the 
Protocol on environmental protection, concerning the comprehensive 
regulation of tourism and non-governmental activities pursuant to 
this Protocol.

From a legal viewpoint, three arguments for the adoption of 
such an Annex may be advanced.

A comprehensive framework regulating tourism and non-
governmental activities, agreed to between the Parties to the 
Protocol, would allow States at their national levels to enact a 
coherent and homogeneous body of laws and regulations, thereby 
avoiding the danger of serious inconsistencies . The provisions of 
the Protocol, with the exception of Annex I related to the 
environmental impact evaluations, are too general and imprecise on 
the subject of tourism and non-governmental activities; this may 
lead to the negative result that national laws and regulations in 
this field may become inconsistent enough so as to fail to meet te 
goals of the Antarctctic Treaty .System, and may also be exploited 
by travel organisers.

Furthermore, an Annex to the Protocol would offer the 
advantage of creating a rule with indisputable legally binding 
force. Considering how important these activities are in 
connection with the protection of the environment, the joint 
adoption by the Parties of comprehensive regulations on tourism 
and non-governmental activities should not be implemented by means 
of a recommendation. Indeed approved recommendations are seldom 
applied because some States do not attach a legally binding nature 
to them. Thus in matter relating to tourism and non-governmental 
activities, the requirement for prior information, as set forth in 
recommendation IV-27 and VI-7, has not often been met. Moreover, 
the list of sites of special tourist interest specified in 
recommendation VII-9, though adopted in 1975, has never been 
drafted. Under these circumstances, an Annex to the Protocol 
appears to be, from the legal point of view, the most appropriate 
form to regulate tourism and non-governmental activities in a 
comprehensive manner.

Finally, the adoption of an Annex to the Protocol addressing 
these matters and its indisputable binding force, would enable all 
the States Parties to the Protocol, and not just those with the 
largest numbers of nationals travelling to Antarctica for non-
scientific or unofficial activities to be involved in regulating 
these activities.

From a political point of view, the adoption of an Annex 
seems most appropriate: Tourism is developing rapidly in 
Antarctica and public opinion which is increasingly concerned with 
environmental protection, would not understand that these 
activities, which may be detrimental to the natural environment, 
are not covered by regulations agreed to between the States 
Parties to the Protocol, in conformity with the spirit and 
provisions of said Protocol.
From a practical point of view it seems expecially useful to allow travel organisers, indipendent visitors and non-governmental organizations clearly to know what their possibilities and obligations will be when planning trips to Antarctica. They must have at their disposal clearly understandable documents which summarize sometimes complex regulations that are usually not detailed enough and are scattered throughout the Protocol: In these regards, it must be recalled that the Protocol is applicable to all types of activities. Before national laws enter into force in each of the States Parties to the Protocol, the Annex would serve as a useful reference.

Furthermore, the adoption of such an Annex would give an opportunity in practical terms, to remind those who carry out non-scientific or non-official activities that they have an obligation to respect the scientific value of Antarctica, as the Protocol has made it clear.

Finally, the aim of the five countries which are jointly proposing the draft Annex enclosed herein is to answer a need. They are not attempting to add further constraints to those set forth in the Protocol, but to render the Protocol more clear and precise in light of acquired experience. There is no question, in any event, of banning, or restricting in any arbitrary way tourist and non-governmental activities, but the idea is to regulate them in compliance with the Protocol, by means of clear provisions so that the natural Antarctic environment and its value for the purposes of peaceful activities and scientific research will be preserved in a reasonable and consistent manner.
1

ARTICLE 1
PRINCIPLE

In accordance with the Protocol and its Annexes, any visit 
or stay in Antarctica may be organised provided that they do not 
adversely affect either the environment of Antarctica and its 
dependent ecosystem, or the conduct of scientific activities.
ARTICLE 2

DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Annex it is understood by:

1. "Organised group visitor" any natural person taking part in a
trip prepared by a "tour organiser".

2. "Tour organiser" any enterprise or any organisation that,
for other than scientific purposes, organises tours to
Antarctica, under its own responsability.

3. "Independent visitor" any person that organises on his/her own
account a trip to Antarctica.

4. "Non-official visitor" any visitor to the Antarctic Treaty
Area, who is not carryng out a mission on behalf of one the
States Party to the Protocol.

5. "Area of tourist interst" an "Antarctic Specially Managed
Area" in which tourist activities take place.

6. "Antarctic Specially Managed Area" any area as defined in
Article 4 of Annex V to the Protocol.
ARTICLE 3 
APPLICATION

1. Persons concerned:

The provisions of this Annex shall apply to any non-official visitor during his travel and stay in the Antarctic Treaty Area and not carrying out either a scientific activity sponsored by a State party to the Protocol or a fishing activity of those regulated by the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and also to any natural or juridical person organizing this type of travels and stays in Antarctica.

2. Place opened for travel and stays:

a) the areas of tourist interest that shall be established under a Recommendation of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting, in the Antarctic Continent, the islands south of 60° Latidude South and the ice shelves, shall be opened to the travels and stays above mentioned.

b) Access to other areas of the Antarctic continent, the islands south of 60° Latitude South or the ice shelves for other than scientific purposes is possible only after a completion of the procedure set forth in paragraph 5 of Article 3 of Annex 1 to the Protocol. To determine the possibility of access to such areas, it shall be taken into particular account whether or not they have already been the subject of scientific investigation.
ARTICLE 4

CONDITIONS TO BE MET BY ANY TOUR ORGANISER
OR INDEPENDENT VISITOR IN THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA

1. Tour organisers, organised group visitors and independent
visitors shall be fully informed as to the consequences of
their presence in that area and shall abide by the measures
intended to preserve the environment.

2. Procedure to be accomplished prior to start of travel:

a) any tour organiser or independent visitor shall, at the
latest 15 months prior to commencement of a tour in the
Antartctic Treaty Area, give notice of their projects to
the State Party to the Protocol in which the organiser has
its principal place of business, or of which the
independent visitor is a national, remitting for this
purpose the respective background information.

b) such background information should include, in particular:

- in the case of a tour organiser, a copy of the
authorisation to carry out its activities, extended by
the authorities of the country in which it has its
principal place of business;

- a general description giving purpose and also dates of
travel and stays, navigation plan, detailed itinerary of
route and sites to be visited, number of visitors,
conditions of how visits will be conducted in the
Antarctic Continent, numbers and qualification of crew
members, including the professional qualifications of the
tour guide or guide of organised groups;

- An environmental Impact Assessment established by the
tour organiser or by the independent visitor in
compliance with the procedures set forth in Annex I to
the Protocol, that shall cover the whole circuit in the
Antarctic Treaty Area;

- a declaration of the tour organiser or of the independent
visitor on their willingness to prevent eventual
environmental damages;

- the authorisation of the person in charge of each
scientific station at which a stop is contemplated;
- the measures that the tour organiser commits himself to adopt for the information and guidance of tourist and to avoid calling upon outside assistance;

- an indication of the type of insurance the tour organiser commits himself to contract and the nature of the risk covered, as well as the maximum amount of the compensations in the event of an accident;

- the appropriate documents which will permit an assessment of the financial standing of the tour organiser;

- the list of special equipment to be used and provisions intended for the purpose of keeping travel and stay self-sufficiently;

- in the case of a tour organiser, adequate self-contained means of rescue, as well as the means to prevent marine pollution in the event of an accident;

c) Tour organisers and independent visitor whose States are not Parties to the Protocol and its Annexes, who intend to comply with the provisions of this Annex, may apply to the Depositary of the Protocol or to any other organisation designated by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

3. During the trip:

The tour organiser or the independent visitor commi

- abide by and systematically enforce the norms of conduct for tourists drawn up by the Consultative Meeting, after the recommendation of the Committee for Environmental Protection;

- confirm their arrival at the scientific stations from which authorization has been obtained, at least seventy two hours in advance;

- comply with all other measures contained in the Protocol and its Annexes, as well as the recommendations of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings;

- present copies of all insurance policies covering their liability for pollution and other risks;
6

4. After the trip:

At the end of each tourist season, any tour organiser or 
independent visitor who has been required to submit a 
comprehensive environmental evaluation, should transmit, 
under the procedures mentioned at Article 5 of Annex I to 
the Protocol, a report on the conduct of its/his activities 
and on environmental consequences of such activities.
ARTICLE 5

FUNCTION OF STATES PARTIES

1. Each State which is a Party shall, within its powers, adopt 
the appropriate measures to guarantee compliance of the 
provisions of this Annex and of the recommendations adopted 
pursuant to Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. It shall 
decide upon sanctions in the event of infringement by its 
nationals. It should inform the Antarctic Treaty Consultative 
Meeting of the measures so taken, including any sanctions 
applied in cases of infringement.

2. Each State Party shall prepare documentation describing areas 
open for visits and explaining practical guidelines to be 
observed by visitors. It shall control that accompanying 
personnel receive the proper training.

3. Each State Party in which the tour organiser has its principal 
place of business or in which the independent visitor is a 
national and has his/her permanent residence, will give the 
corresponding prior emission. Should the planned trip or stay 
require a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation, the State 
Party shall take its decision only upon the advice of the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.

4. Each State Party undertakes to exert appropriate efforts, 
consistent with the United Nations Charter, to the end that n[?] 
one engages in any activity contrary to the provisions of this 
Annex. Each State Party shall inform the Consultative Meeting 
of any activity contrary to this Annex which comes to its 
knowledge.

5. The concerned State Party shall not authorize for a maximum 
five years period, any trip to Antarctica planned by a tour 
organiser or by an independent visitor that has not complied 
with the obligations set out in the Protocol and its Annexes 
on the occasion of a previous travel.

6. Each State Party will provide the Committee for Environmental 
Protection with the appropriate information on trips made to 
Antarctica by its nationals.
8

ARTICLE 6

FUNCTION OF THE COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

1. The Committee for Environmental Protection may propose the 
designation of areas of tourist interst and their management 
plans. To that end it may consult the Scientific Committee on 
Antarctic Research and the Council of Managers of National 
Antarctic Programmes.

2. The Committee for Environmental Protection shall be in charge,
in particular, of formulating to the Parties for consideration 
at Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings recommendations on:
- directives concerning the terms on which visits may take place 
to areas of tourist interest and scientific stations;
- directives on the training of crews and accompanying personnel 
and on information to visitors concerning compliance with 
rules and concerning the hazards involved;
- any other measure it deems appropriate;

3. The Committee for Environmental Protection shall formulate 
recommendations to the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting 
concerning the plans for travel and stay which are transmitted 
to it.

4. The Committee shall propose any measure to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting to ensure tha monitoring and 
supervision of such visits and activities.

5. The Committee shall periodically publish statistics of the 
number of visitors per areas visited. It shall present, for 
the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, a periodical 
report on the conduct of such activities, their environmental 
impact and on the emergency situations which it has had to 
deal with.

6. The Committee shall be empowered to propose to the Antarctic 
Treaty Consultative Meeting a temporary limitation of the 
number of visitors to certain places and the temporary closing 
of certain areas to ensure, at all times, that the flux of 
persons and material is compatible with the receiving capacity 
and safeguarding of the areas visited.
ARTICLE 7

FUNCTION OF THE ANTARCTIC TREATY CONSULTATIVE MEETING

1. Taking as basis the recommendation of the Committee for Environmental Protection, the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall, as provided in Article 3 (5) of Annex I, notify its favourable or unfavourable advice to the State Party in which the tour organiser has its principal place of busines or of which the independent visitor is a national.

In the case of reiterated Antarctic tours, a favourable advice cannot cover a period of more than two years from the time of its notification.

2. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall draw the attention of any State Party to the Protocol to any tourist activity conducted by its nationals, whether tour organisers or independent visitors, which under its point of view is contrary to the provisions of this Annex.

3. The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting shall draw the attention of any State not being a Party to the Protocol to any tourist activity conducted by its nationals whether tour organisers or independent visitors, contrary to the provisions of this Annex and shall suggest the appropriate measures to avoid environmental damages.
10

ARTICLE 8
LOGISTICS

1. In order to ensure the highest environmental protection possible, the structure and equipment of the ships used for the carriage of passengers and cargo, in the Antarctic Treaty Area, shall permit them to face the very special conditions of navigation in that region and shall have the basic adequate means for the prevention of marine pollution in the case of an accident. To the fullest extent possible:
    - hulls should be strengthened for navigation amongst ice;
    - certain vital equipment (steering gear, propulsion system, navigation equipment such as radar, sonar, satellite links and locator beacons) should be duplicated;
    - rescue equipment should be of a type designed specially for polar regions;
    - equipment for the disembarkation and embarkation of passengers should be of adequate nature and quantity and should be handled by qualified personnel.

2. While sailing in the Antarctic Treaty Area, ships shall comply with the rules related to the prevention of marine pollution and collisions as with those for safety of human life, including the constraints arising from the designation of the Antarctic as a "special area" by MARPOL 73/78.

To that end, crews shall receive special training for navigation in polar areas and shall be experienced. Presence of pilots on board is mandatory.

Ships carrying groups of visitors shall, to the fullest extent possible, be provided with helicopters. The latter shall be reserved for purposes of rescue and aid to navigation. The use of helicopters for other purposes shall be compatible, at all times, with the principles and provisions of the Protocol and its Annexes.

3. Tour organisers and independent visitors shall give confirmation of the practical details of their visit to the person in charge of the station, seventy two hours before the planned time of arrival.
4. If at all possible, the stays of visitors ashore will only be during daytime. Authorisation to land is restricted to:

- scientific stations, at which they shall comply with the 
  instructions from the person in charge of the station;

- areas of tourist interest, where visitors shall be placed 
  under the control and responsability of the tour 
  organiser.

5. The decision to undertake the construction, in the Antarctic 
   Treaty Area, of an infrastructure afloat or ashore, for the 
   accomodation of visitors or for their leisure activities 
   shall only be taken upon prior favourable advice of the 
   Antarctic Treaty Conasultative Meeting, after examining such 
   project in accordance with the provisions of Annex I to the 
   Protocol.
12

ARTICLE 9
SURVEILLANCE AND INSPECTION

1. Surveillance of areas visited, of aircrafts and ships, shall 
be ensured in accordance with the conditions decided by the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings, upon the advice of the 
Committee for Environmental Protection and pursuant to Article 
14 of the Protocol.

2. To the fullest extent possible, there shall be periodical 
inspection of each "tourist interest area" and of such other 
parts of the Antarctic Continent, the islands south of 60o 
Latidude South and ice shelves as are visited for non-
scientific purposes.
13

ARTICLE 10
INSURANCE

1.      Every tour organiser and each independent visitor shall take out such insurance as shall enable them to make repayment to State Parties for expenses incurred by the latter in the event of accident or environmental damage owing to rescue operations, clean-up, repair or of any other nature.

2.      State Parties involved in operations of rescue, clean-up or repair of damage done to the environment, shall be empowered to request the reimbursement of the expenses incurred in such operations.

3.      The above provisions are understood to be without prejudice to future rules and procedures related to the liability referred to in Article 16 of the Protocol.
ARTICLE 11
CASES OF EMERGENCY

1. Party States undertake to cooperate and to do their utmost to
save human lives in the event of an accident.

2. This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to
the safety of human life or of ships, aircraft or equipment
and facilities of high value, or with the protection of the
environment, which require an activity to be undertaken
without complying with the procedures set out in this Annex.

3. Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency, which
in other circumstances would have required the preparation of
a Comprehensive Environmental Evaluation, shall be sent
immediately to all Parties and to the Committee and likewise a
full explanation of the activities carried out shall be
provided within 90 days of those activities.
ARTICLE 12
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION

1. This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies the Depositary, within that period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it is unable to approve the measure.

2. Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party, when notice of approval of it has been received by the Depositary.
