ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

VENICE
11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 9
9 November 1992
Original: Spanish

COMMISSION ON ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

Agenda Item 6.b

(Submitted by Chile)
XVII ATCM/WP
(Chile)

COMMISSION ON ANTARCTIC
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

(Agenda Item 6)

1.       In the next years, Antarctic Treaty members
will focus on the issue of environmental protection in
Antarctica. The presence of man in Antarctica will increase
as a consequence of two  significant activities, namely
science and tourism.

2.       Chile has always kept a constant commitment
with reference to environmental protection in Antarctica and
taken significant initiatives in this respect.

Indeed, during the Washington Conference in 1959, Chile
suggested the inclusion of the only ecological measure
envisaged by the Antarctic Treaty and contained in Article
IX, paragraph 1, letter f. Subsequently, during the III ATCM
in Brussels in 1964, the commitment of Chile in this respect
contributed to the adoption of the Measures for the
Protection of Antarctic Fauna and Flora. Finally, during the
XV ATCM in Paris, the Chilean Delegation proposed the
adoption of the " Global Measures for the Protection of the
Antarctic Environment and its related and associated
ecosystems". This proposal was adopted in Recommendation XV-
1, which can be considered the forerunner of the Madrid
Protocol.

3.       The Protocol of the Antarctic Treaty on
environmental protection is timely. This document and its
annexes will be increasingly important in the necessary
effort to prevent the pollution of Antarctic ice, land,
water and atmosphere.

4.       During the XVI Antarctic Treaty Consultative
Meeting held in Bonn in 1991, the Chilean Delegation urged
the replacement of traditional preparatory meetings and
biennial consultative meetings with an annual Consultative
Meeting, given the nature of the Protocol and its Annexes.
As new initiatives are being taken, the Commission on
Environmental Protection plays a fundamental role as a
consultative body. Articles 11 and 12 of the Protocol define
its composition, functions, schedule of meetings and the
reports which it is to prepare.

5.       Paragraph 16 of the Final Act of the XI
1
Extraordinary Consultative Meeting during which the Protocol was approved urges the Parties to implement it spontaneously as soon as it is enforced. Paragraph 31 of the Final Report of the XVI ATCM in Bonn established that the preparatory work to draw up the Rules of Procedure of the Commission should begin in the following ATCM. According to the Report, this aspect does not only refer to the participation or decision-making process, but also the methods of work, the venue and schedule of meetings and all that is necessary to implement the provisional decisions of the Madrid Act.

6.       The concept of provisional implementation has a long tradition in the Antarctic Treaty System, starting from the First Provisional Consultative Meeting held in Washington before the enforcement of the Antarctic Treaty. The approved measures, the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seal and for the Conservation of Antarctic Living Resources were preceded by provisional measures. Similarly, the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources and the Protocol of the Antarctic Treaty on Environmental Protection respectively envisaged moratoria on mineral activities in Antarctica. All international conventions on environmental protection envisage mechanisms allowing or favouring the provisional implementation of these international instruments while they are being ratified or enforced.

7.       Apparent consensus has been reached on the need for a provisional implementation of the Annexes to the Protocol. The Commission on Environmental Protection plays a crucial role in this respect, in particular to provide documents and information about the assessment of the environmental impact as envisaged by Annex I and to reach a common approach and a certain continuity in debates on environmental issues during Consultative Meetings. Furthermore, the Commission is indispensable to keep contact with the Antarctic area and the state of Antarctic environment and its related ecosystems. The decision on the seat of the above-mentioned Commission and the venue of some of its working sessions is to take this factor into consideration since some of the plenary sessions or meetings of their working groups may be held in Antarctica.

8.       In this context, the decision to establish the seat of the Commission in a country close to Antarctica and with rapid air and sea connections with the area may render the activity of this organism more effective. This activity includes supplying information at the end of the Antarctic summer but may also call for intersessional meetings and preparatory work on the part of Antarctic scientific and logistic organizations which are often supported by data banks or Antarctic centres located in the
2
Southern Hemisphere or other regions.

9.     Chile believes to meet the necessary 
requirements to host the Commission and put at its disposal 
facilities and geographic advantages, namely accomodation 
for 60 or more persons, air transport connections between 
the airfield of the Teniente Rodolfo Marsh Scientific 
Station on King George Island and Punta Arenas International 
Airport (two and a half hour flight) thanks to quick air 
connections with Santiago de Chile. The creation of a 
reference point without permanent staff in Santiago would 
facilitate contacts with an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat 
which would be only at two hours by plane, should its 
headquarters be in Buenos Aires. However, the reference 
point does not imply the elimination of annual ATCM and 
Sessions' different venues, but rather promotes continuity 
through possible changes of meeting points.

10.     Considering the adoption of decisions on the 
subject, importance is to be attached to the better 
distribution of Antarctic System Organisms. Indeed, they 
have been usually set up in the Northern Hemisphere, with 
the exception of South America, Antarctic regions and 
Hobart, Australia, which is the headquarters of the CCAMLR. 
The USA is actually the repository of the Antarctic Treaty 
and its Protocol on Environmental Protection. Moreover, the 
Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programmes 
(COMNAP) and the Standing Commission for Antarctic Logistic 
and Operative Programmes (SCALOP) of the SCAR are seated in 
Washington. The United Kingdom is the repository of the 
Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seal (CCAS) and 
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), the 
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) and the 
International Whale Commission Secretariat are seated in 
Cambridge. It must be added that New Zealand is the 
repository of CRAMRA.

11.     This disequilibrium is indeed present within 
other international and regional organisations. 
Significantly, with reference to environmental issues, the 
headquarters of the United Nations Commission for 
Sustainable Development will be established either in Geneva 
or New York. The new conventions on climatic changes and 
biological diversity will be equally seated in the Northern 
Hemisphere. The seats of the International Council of 
Scientific Unions (ICSU), which includes the SCAR, and 
almost all environmental programmes as well as 
investigations on global change continue to be located in 
the Northern Hemisphere: SCOPE, MAB, PIGB, START, IGAC, 
BAHC, GAIM, LOICZ, JGOFS, GOEZS, HDGEC. Once again, the only 
exception is the programme on Global Change in Terrestrial 
3
Ecosystems (GCTE), which is based on the national 
organisation of Australian scientific investigation (CSIRO). 
Certainly, all scientific bodies connected to the ICSU are 
seated in the Northern Hemisphere as well as UNESCO, IMO, 
IOC, WMO, IPCC and the numerous international scientific and 
environmental programmes developed by the above-mentioned 
organisations.

12.      In order to temporarily implement the 
Protocol's provisions and facilitate the successful 
activities of the Commission on Environmental Protection, 
many alternatives exist, ranging from the enforcement of a 
relevant Recommendation to the laying down, in the Venice 
XVII ATCM Final Report, of the Parties' will to take the 
necessary steps in this respect. On the basis of past 
experience, a group of experts monitoring or implementing 
all the above-mentioned activities may be set up. During the 
XVII ATCM, the first step in this direction is the creation 
of an ad hoc working group enchanced with enforcing par. 31 
of the XVI ATCM Final Report.

By 1993 Santiago de Chile will have met the 
requirements to host this working group.

Venice, 11 November 1992.

 
                    4
