ANTARCTIC TREATY                                 TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                  XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                        ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                                  VENICE
                                  11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 7
9 November 1992
Original: English

 
POSSIB ANTARCTIC TREATY SECRETARIAT:
POSSIBLE MODALITIES AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS

Agenda Item 7.a

(Submitted by The Netherlands)
Antarctic Treaty Secretariat: Possible Modalities and their Implications

1. At the XVIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting in Bonn, as well as at earlier ATCM's, ample consideration was given to the question of the desirability of establishing an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat. As a consensus has proven impossible so far, it was agreed to further consider the matter at the XVIIth ATCM in Venice.

In this paper an attempt is made to analyze in some detail the possible modalities of such a Secretariat, taking as a starting point the suggestions concerning its possible tasks which were offered to the XVIth ATCM in the working and information papers submitted by the delegations of the United States, Japan and Uruguay. By sketching a clearer picture of what such a Secretariat would amount to in practical and financial terms, decision-making by the ATCM in Venice, hopefully, will be facilitated.

2. At the XVIth ATCM parties seemed to agree that a decision on the establishment of a Secretariat should be guided by the principle that its main function should be to support the effective functioning of the consultative mechanism, while guaranteeing its efficiency and consistency. Accordingly, the creation of a Secretariat should not in any way diminish the authority of the ATCM, nor reduce the responsibility of the rotating ATCM chairmanship; a Secretariat should alleviate administrative, organizational and executive tasks of the chairman and provide such information and liaison services as the ATCM would consider useful.

3. The potential tasks of an AT Secretariat can be grouped in several clusters of higher and lower priority. Subsequently, the personnel and infrastructural requirements of their implementation can be assessed. Finally, the financial implications can be estimated, under certain specific assumptions.

3.1. Potential tasks

Five clusters of related tasks can be distinguished:

a) Administrative support for consultative meetings:
    - translating, printing and distributing documents before and at (Special) Consultative Meetings, intersessional meetings of working groups and the Environmental Committee,
    - translating, printing and distributing the final reports of (Special) Consultative Meetings.

b) Documentation on the Antarctic Treaty system:
    - issuing regular updates of the Antarctic Treaty Handbook,
- providing information on activities under the Antarctic Treaty system to third parties, upon request,
- collecting and distributing information which is relevant for the Parties ("Antarctic Treaty News Letter").

c) Assistance to the Chairman of the Consultative Meeting:
- advizing on the organization of the Consultative Meeting, and assisting in its preparations,
- performing liaison tasks for the chairman, both concerning contacts with Antarctic Treaty Parties, among the components of the Antarctic Treaty system and with relevant international organizations,
- attending meetings of the other components of the Antarctic Treaty system, especially CCAMLR, SCAR and COMNAP.

d) Intersessional assistance of ATP's:
- advizing Parties, upon request, on procedures under the Antarctic Treaty system and on the implementation of specific obligations,
- facilitating co-operation among Parties by serving as intermediary and by advizing on practical aspects of such co-operation.

e) Assistance in the implementation of the Environmental Protocol and its Annexes:
- to be decided later, but before entry into force.

Each of these tasks can be implemented in a more or in a less extensive way. At the Bonn ATCM, however, a clear preference was expressed for a small, cost-effective Secretariat.

3.2. Personnel and infrastructure required

In assessing the personnel and infrastructural requirements for establishing an Antarctic Treaty Secretariat the following assumptions are made:

i)  all five clusters identified (task (e) still needs to be worked out) deserve to be included in the Secretariat's mandate,

ii) translation services will be provided by specialized agencies on an ad hoc basis,

iii) special expertise, e.g. to conduct certain studies to assist the Environmental Committee, can be made available by individual Parties or can be recruited on a temporary basis,

iv). Consultative Meetings will continue to be hosted and financed by successive Consultative Parties (to preserve the vitality of the consultative mechanism); however, all costs involved in the participation of Secretariat members including the cost of the assistance provided by them, will be borne by the Secretariat,
v) appropriate office space and equipment for the Secretariat will be made available for a number of years at no cost by the host Government and, 
thereafter, at a guaranteed fixed low price.

On this basis the following assessments can be made:

Personnel required

The implementation of tasks a), b), c) and d) would require three to five professional staff, assisted by not more than five administrative and other local staff members. The implementation of task e) might create the need for some personnel increase. 
Assuming that salaries would be comparable to those customary in the UN-system, the cost of salaries for the Secretariat would be in the order of 400,000 - 600,000 US Dollars, depending mainly on the exact number of staff and the cost of living in the host country.

Office space and equipment

The Secretariat would need modern, fully equipped office capacity (including communication facilities) of not more than 200 square metres. After a number of years the cost of this would have to be borne by the Parties. At present those costs would be difficult to estimate, as they, obviously, would depend very much on local real estate prices and conditions offered by the host Government.

Translating and Printing

Translating, printing and distributing of ATCM-documents would be one of the central tasks of the Secretariat.

Translation services can be hired from specialized agencies on an ad hoc basis at prices of around 25 US Dollars per page. Thus, given the four Antarctic Treaty official languages, the price of one translated page (into three other languages) would be, at the moment, approximately 75 US Dollars. If with additional costs and a certain price increase the cost of translating would in some years rise to 100 US Dollars per page, and if the number of translated pages would rise to 1000 per year (at the moment not more than a few hundred) total cost of translating would be 100,000 US Dollars annually.

The costs of printing and copying by the Secretariat and, in some cases, by external printers, of a few thousand (high estimate) pages annually, leasing copying machines etc, and distributing copies to the Contracting Parties and other qualified recipients should not go beyond 50,000 US Dollars per year.
Travel and other costs

An important task of the Secretariat would be to offer secretarial and organizational assistance in the preparations and proper conduct of consultative meetings. Members of the Secretariat, therefore, should attend those meetings. In addition, a member of the Secretariat would need to attend the annual meetings of CCAMLR, SCAR and COMNAP and one or a few other meetings, e.g. with the chairman of the Consultative Meeting. This would involve travel costs of between 50,000 and 100,000 US Dollars per year, depending, of course, very much on the geographical location of the Secretariat and the venue of meetings to be attended.

3.3.  Conclusion

These estimates lead to the conclusion that the financial implications of establishing a small, cost effective Antarctic Treaty Secretariat, against the assumptions described above, would be:
- staff                  between 400,000 and 600,000 US Dollars
                            p.m.
- office, etc.          150,000 US Dollars
- translating, etc.
- travel                between 50,000 and 100,000 US Dollars
                            -------------------------------
Total                   between 600,000 and 850,000 US Dollars
                            plus the future costs of office space and
                            equipment.

The contribution of each Antarctic Treaty Party to the budget could be fixed by making use of the UN scale of assessment, of course, adapted to the smaller number of participating Governments.

The Hague, 28 August 1992
