ANTARCTIC TREATY            
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING            
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE            
XVIIème RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                        

                                  VENICE            
                                  11-20 november 1992            
TRATADO ANTÁRTICO            
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA            
ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ            
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ            

XVII ATCM/WP 11            
10 November 1992            
Original: Spanish            

BASIC ELEMENTS FOR AN ANNEX ON THE LIABILITY            
ENVISAGED BY THE ANTARCTIC TREATY PROTOCOL            

Agenda Item 6.c            

(Submitted by Chile)            
XVII ATCM/WP
(Chile)

BASIC ELEMENTS FOR AN ANNEX ON THE LIABILITY
ENVISAGED BY THE ANTARCTIC TREATY PROTOCOL

(Agenda Item 6 (c))

I. INTRODUCTION

Through this document, the Chilean Delegation points out what are the main aspects or the basic subjects to be analysed by the Contracting Parties, with reference to the contents to be regulated by the next Annex on Liability to the Protocol for Environmental Protection. The mandate to prepare this Annex was defined in paragraph 9 of the Protocol Final Act.

Chile attaches great importance to the analysis of this issue, though being fully aware of the difficulty in discussing the numerous topics that will be subsequently listed. This analysis has not yet started in the context of environmental International Law. We believe that by establishing different forms of liability of the Contracting Parties in the implementation of activities envisaged by the Protocol, the provisions of this international instrument will be complied with and Antarctic environmental protection guaranteed.

II. CONTEXT OF IMPLEMENTATION

In accordance with the Protocol the issues regulated by the Annex are to be defined, taking the progress of relevant International Law into consideration.

In short, it is to be pointed out whether it is necessary or advisable to prosecute liability for damage to the environment or any other entity protected by the Protocol; for violating or not complying with the provisions of the Annex; or simply for causing damage by acting without taking any violation of the Protocol or other provisions of the Antarctic System into consideration. The latter case implies the concept of objective or absolute liability. The Contracting Parties have established neither in the Protocol nor in its Final Act which kind of liability is to be negotiated.

The Chilean Delegation maintains that a distinction is necessary between more or less liability-subject activities
1
and between the relevant bodies to apply one or the other 
type of responsibility accordingly.

Considering progress made by the Contracting Parties 
during the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral 
Resource Activities ( CRAMRA), Art. 8, we realize that 
objective liability for the participants in the Antarctic 
System involved in activities regulated by the same document 
was clearly established. Previously existing regulations 
implied high ecological risks in case of accidents provoked 
by the above-mentioned activities and established the 
subsidiary liability of the Country involved. This situation 
has been modified in the Protocol and is to be carefully 
analysed with reference to activities regulated by the 
document and its Annexes.

Activities, actions or omissions that may be subject to 
different types of liability for the Contracting Parties are 
listed in the following section.

a) Non-compliance with Annex I envisaging the suitable 
assessment of the environmental impact or the decision of 
the Parties involved to carry out the activity or action 
despite the Consultative Meeting's rejection. This action 
may cause a great, minimum or nonexistent environmental 
impact. With reference to the second example, would it be a 
case of liability for damage to the environment or for non-
compliance with the Protocol? Apparently, different kinds of 
liability are to be applied.

b) Similarly, we may expatiate upon what has been 
already said about the compliance with the provisions of the 
other Annexes to the Protocol. When does the Contracting 
Party share liability? When is there a violation? and when 
does this violation damage an entity which is to be 
specifically protected or the environment in general?

c) Sea pollution caused by hydrocarbons is the sector 
subject to international liability which has witnessed the 
most rapid progress thanks to its regulation through 
international instruments. Since not all Contracting Parties 
have subscribed to these Conventions, we deem it necessary 
to draw up clear regulations on liability in case of spills 
and dumpings of waste damaging the marine ecosystem within 
the Treaty Area.

d) On the other hand, the liability of one Contracting 
Party, should one of its means of transport have an accident 
thereby mobilising rescue activities, is to be analysed. On 
the basis of International Law the costs of the operation 
must be paid by the ship-brokers either through insurance 
companies or other legal means. All this has not occured in 
2
the Treaty Area. The costs of rescue operations and cleaning activities carried out have been paid by the Countries which first arrived on the spot and had to participate in the above-mentioned activities.

e) Similarly Chile deems it necessary to analyse if a Contracting party damaging the environment while carrying out scientific activities allowed by the Antarctic Treaty System is to be prosecuted. These activities always entail a certain environmental impact which is to be assessed considering the advantages for the scientific progress resulting from this investigation. Minimum acceptable standards must be defined.

III. PROCEDURE TO ASSESS DAMAGE AND ESTABLISH ADEQUATE COMPENSATION

Chile believes that the Commission for Environmental Protection must be given priority in assessing environmental damage caused either by activities violating the Protocol or the nature of the activity itself.

Likewise, the Commission has the power to propose different forms or ways of compensation or compensation based on previous similar experience.

The Commission should rely upon a group of experts who will analyse these cases and write a report which will the lay down the principles to take legal action according to the Annex.

IV. BODIES ENTITLED TO TAKE LEGAL ACTION WITH REFERENCE TO LIABILITY

Only the Contracting Parties will be entitled to take legal action with reference to liability against another or other Contracting Parties.

V. FINAL COMMENTS

Chile reiterates the need to analyse the issue of liability with reference to environmental protection and in compliance with modern legal criteria.

Therefore, the Chilean Delegation invites all Contracting Parties to promote studies on the new Annex, which we consider of great significance.

3
