ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE

TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVII REUNIÓN CONSULTIVA

ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

VENICE
11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 32
19 November 1992
Original: English

REPORT OF WORKING GROUP II
TO THE PLENARY OF THE XVII ATCM

(Working paper submitted by the Secretariat)
Working Group II held meetings on 13, 16, 17, 18 and 19 November 
in order to deal with the following agenda items:

8. Inspection under the Antarctic Treaty
9. Environmental monitoring
10.Implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures
11.The Antarctic Protected Area System
12.International Antarctic scientific and logistic cooperation
14.Antarctic meteorology and telecommunications
15.Marine hydrometeorological services to navigation in the 
Southern Ocean

16.Co-operation in hydrographic surveying and charting of 
Antarctic Waters
17.Air Safety in Antarctica

The Working Group II drafted a number of paragraphs concerning 
the above mentioned items, to be included into the Final Report of 
the XVIIth ATCM

The Working Group II also drafted a number of Recommendations 
concerning the following items:
"Global Change Research and International Co-operation in 
Antarctica"
"Revised description and proposed Management Plans for Special 
Protected Areas"
"Historic Sites and Monuments"
"Environmental Monitoring and Data Mangement"

The drafts of the above- mentioned paragraphs and Recommendations 
are attached.

Item 8
Inspection under the Antarctic Treaty

( ) A number of delegations advised that they would be carrying 
out inspections during 1992/93. None had been carried out since 
the XVIth Consultative Meeting.

( ) The Meeting noted that inspections are a fundamental 
element of the Antarctic Treaty System. It further emphasized the 
importance of promoting inspections within the Antarctic Treaty 
system as a means of monitoring activities in Antarctica and 
exchanging information. The meeting also stressed that 
inspections demonstrate the transparency of the Antarctic Treaty 
System.

( ) The Meeting noted that inspections, in addition to 
verifying adherence to the fundamental principles and objectives 
of the Antarctic Treaty, now require emphasis on environmental 
matters.
( ) The Meeting noted the high cost of conducting inspections. 
Logistic cooperation between Parties was seen as a means of 
reducing these costs.

( ) To enhance the quality of inspections and to assist in 
comparing inspection results, the Meeting considered that there 
would be value in having an agreed check-list of items that might 
be referred to when conducting inspections.

( ) The Meeting agreed to invite SCAR and COMNAP to prepare an 
inspection check-list, based on existing examples,such as those 
indicated in paragraph 59 of the Final Report of the XVIth ATCM to 
assist assessment of adherence to the requirements of the 
Antarctic Treaty and the Protocol on Environmental Protection. It 
was recognized that such a check-list would not limit a Party's 
individual action in conducting inspections.

( ) ASOC, attending the Meeting as an invited expert, expressed 
the view that a permanent technical and scientific team should be 
established to carry out inspections relating to the Antarctic 
environment.A number of delegations expressed their view that a 
permanent inspection team to be unnecessary and that the present 
arrangements for inspections are appropriate.

Item 9 
Environmental Monitoring

(...) The Meeting welcomed and considered the valuable Report 
and the recommendations of the First Meeting of Experts on 
Environmental Monitoring in Antarctica (XVII ATCM/INFO9). The 
terms of reference for the Meeting, held in Buenos Aires on 1-4 
June, 1992, were set forth in paragraphs 62-66 of the Report of 
ATCM XVI (Bonn, 1991). Paragraphs 106-109 of the above report 
passed also to the Meeting the consideration of the creation of an 
Antarctic environmental and scientific data system.

( ) The Meeting also welcomed and considered the report by 
SCAR/COMNAP (XVII ATCM/ WP 5) describing actions that could be 
taken to develop a coordinated data management system, with a view 
to improving the comparability and accessibility of both 
scientific and environmental data being collected by national 
programs as called for by ATCM Recommendations XIII-5 and XV-16.

(...) With regard to environmental monitoring the Meeting 
noted and endorsed the general objectives of Environmental 
Monitoring set forth in paragraph 32 of the Report of the First 
Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring and the specific 
objectives of Antarctic Environmental Impact Monitoring set forth 
in paragraph 33 of the Report.

(...) The Meeting considered the conclusions set forth in 
paragraphs 43 and 44 of the Report, in particular that: (i) the 
nature and scale of most activities in Antarctica at present are 
such that they are unlikely to have significant adverse 
environmental impact as defined in Article 3 of, and the Annexes 
to the Protocol on Environmental Protection except at the local 
level; (ii) the possibility and significance of environmental
impacts depend upon the location, timing, and scale as well as the 
nature of the activities; and (iii) the activities and events most 
likely to have impacts of possible concern are:

a) station and airstrip construction and logistic operations;

b) waste water and sewage disposal;

c) incineration of waste;

d) power and heat generation;

e) activities involving or affecting native flora and fauna;

f) scientific research; and

g) accidents resulting in fuel spills or other types of en-
vironmental contamination.

( ) The Meeting also considered the examples of activities 
causing possible impacts on the Antarctic environment set forth in 
Table 3 of the Report of the First Meeting of Experts.

(...) The Meeting further noted paragraph 103 of the Report 
which points out that some form of monitoring may be required to 
ensure compliance with the Protocol on Environmental Protection. 
For example, at least a sub-set of the seal and bird colonies 
visited regularly by tourists, researchers and others should be 
monitored to verify that they are not being affected adversely by 
human activities. SCAR should be asked for advice on types of 
monitoring needed to verify that human activities do not have 
unforeseen effects on Antarctic birds, seals and plants.

(...) The Meeting took special note of paragraph 49 of the 
Report of the First Meeting of Experts, which indicates that 
environmental impact monitoring programs should be designed to 
answer specific question or to test specific hypotheses.

(...) The Meeting also took special note of paragraphs 107-
110 of the Report, which point out that environmental impact 
monitoring programmes should be carefully designed, practicable, 
cost-effective and focused only on what is essential to meet the 
requirements of the Protocol. Unnecessary monitoring will consume 
substantial resources that may diminish the ability of Parties to 
undertake key research thus reducing the overall value of 
Antarctic science.

(...) The Meeting noted the concern expressed in the Report 
that resources required to meet the environmental monitoring 
challenge may not be available. The: Meeting further noted the 
value of developing cooperative programs as a means for carrying 
out cost-effective and productive monitoring.

(...) On the basis of recommendations of the First Meeting of 
Experts, the Meeting adopted Recommendation XVII-... . The 
Meeting noted that the recommended activities would assist the 
work of the Committee for Environmental Protection to be
established when the Protocol enters into force.

        (...) With regard to data management, the Meeting considered 
and agreed on the scheme and steps proposed in the Report of the 
First Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring for the 
creation of a cooperative Data Management System. In this regard 
the Meeting agreed that Parties should continue efforts to 
identify national data sets for eventual inclusion in the 
Antarctica Data Directory. Documentation of these data sets should 
follow the format described in paragraph 70 of the Report of the 
First Meeting of Experts on Environmental Monitoring. This format 
may be subsequently modified to make it compatible with the 
International Directory Network referred to in the SCAR/COMNAP 
Report (XVII ATCM/ WP 5).

        (...) It was also considered by the Meeting that the Parties 
should convene through their SCAR and COMNAP representatives a 
workshop to help initiate the implementation of the Antarctic Data 
Directory System. The workshop should:

    * identify the steps necessary to establish the Antarctic Data 
Directory System as part of the existing International Directory 
Network;

    * finalize the format for Antarctic Data Directory entries;

    * prepare a draft Antarctic Data Directory for circulation to 
all Parties, including properly formatted entries from 
contributing Parties;

    * identify the kinds of geographic information system currently 
being used by national program operators to organize, store, 
display and analyse Antarctic data; and consider whether the 
Antarctic Digital Topographic Database produced under the auspices 
of SCAR or another system can be used as the basis for a common 
computer map system for for plotting data.

        (...) The Meeting agreed to consider the need, at the next 
ATCM, for another Meeting of Experts to consider such questions as 
available technologies, monitoring methods and protocols, 
standardisation of data collection methods; quality assurance and 
data analysis and interpretation.

        (...) The Russian Delegation presented a working paper on 
environmental monitoring (XVII ATCM/WP 30) and the items contained 
therein could help in the discussion of future work.
Item 10
Implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures

( ) On this issue documents were presented by New Zealand (XVII ATCM/INFO 19) , France (XVII ATCM/INFO 35), Finland (XVII ATCM/INFO 45 AND 46) , United States (XVII ATCM/INFO 68) , Germany (ATCM/INFO 71) and ASOC (XVII ATCM/INFO 70) thus providing information and presenting commentaries on recently developed and future activities.

( ) The Representative of COMNAP reported that it has developed practical guidelines relating to implementation of environmental impact assessment procedures based on the Protocol on Environmental Protection and its Annexes.

( ) The Representative of SCAR reported that GOSEAC is examining the scientific content of IEE's and CEE's produced so far.

( ) The Meeting welcomed these efforts and emphasized the importance of continuing efforts to implement the environmental assessment procedures set forth in the Protocol on Environmental Protection.

Item 11
The Antarctic Protected Area System

11. a) Revised description and proposed management plans for Specially Protected Areas.

( ) The United Kingdom tabled a draft recommendation (XVII ATCM/WP 22) setting out revised descriptions and proposed management plans for the following Specially Protected Areas:
    SPA No. 1 Taylor Rookery, Mac Robertson Land;
    SPA No. 2 Rookery Island, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land;
    SPA No. 3 Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast;
    SPA No. 20 "New College Valley", Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island.

Management plans for SPAs 1,2, and 3 were prepared by Australia and SPA 20 by New Zealand and had been recommended and approved at SCAR XXII.

Recommendation.... was adopted

( ) The Meeting agreed that Parties should require that their national programme operators and, to the maximum extent possible, persons subjected to their jurisdiction comply with the provisions of the above management plans, and the management plans for SPAs, 8,9,13,14,15,16,18 and 19 annexed to the Report of ATCM XVI.

11. b) Historic Sites and Monuments

( ) Argentina submitted a draft recommendation (XVII ATCM/WP
27/rev. 2) to designate a wooden plaque and rock cairn at Penguin Bay, Southern Coast of Seymour Island (Marambio)(64°16'00" S, 
56°39'10" W) as a Historic Monument.

Recommendation....was adopted

( ) New Zealand announced its intention to propose the listing of 
the northern slopes of Mt. Erebus above Lewis Bay, which was the 
site of the Air New Zealand DC 10 crash in November 1979, as an 
Historic Site as is provided for in Article 8 of Annex 5 of the 
Protocol.

11 c Review and Implementation of the System

( ) The Meeting considered measures that could be taken to improve 
the Antarctic Protected Area System and to begin to give effect to 
the provisions of Protocol Annex V. The Meeting was assisted in 
this regard by a paper (XVII ATCM----) summarizing the results of 
a Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas held jointly by SCAR and 
IUCN, 29 June - 2 July 1992. The Meeting noted that some aspects 
of this paper related to issues beyond the Protected Area System 
and that these were not addressed explicitly.

( ) The Meeting noted that, when Protocol Annex V enters into 
force, all SPAs and SSSIs designated as such by past ATCMs will be 
designated as Antarctic Specially Protected Areas and be renamed 
and renumbered accordingly. The Meeting recognized that the 
management plans for many SSSIs and SPAs may need to be revised at 
that time to ensure they conform with the provisions of the 
Protocol. The Meeting also recognized that the Committee for 
Environmental Protection, which will be establish when the 
Protocol enters into force, will be required to provide its 
advice. To assist in this regard, it was agreed that the Parties 
which originally proposed the existing SSSIs and SPAs should 
review their management plans and be prepared to submit proposed 
revisions for consideration when the Protocol enters into force. 
It also was agreed that SCAR could be asked to provide assistance 
to Parties in reviewing and revising management plans to conform 
with the provisions of the Protocol.

( ) With regard to the previous point, the Meeting was advised 
that SCAR was preparing a handbook to assist in the preparation of 
management plans. The Meeting welcomed this information, 
recognizing that the h[?]ndbook could be useful to the Parties and 
the CEP, as well as SCAR. It urged SCAR to complete and make the 
handbook available as soon as possible.

( ) The Meeting also was advised that the joint SCAR/IUCN Workshop 
on Protected Areas had begun revision of the ecosystem 
classification system developed by SCAR to assist in identifying 
areas that might usefully be included in the Antarctic Protected 
Area System. The Meeting noted that the classification system 
might be useful to the Parties for deciding, and to the CEP for 
providing advice on, measures necessary to meet the requirements 
of Article 3 (2) of Protocol Annex V which specifies that the 
Parties shall seek to include certain types of areas in the series 
of Antarctic Specially Protected Areas. The Meeting urged SCAR and 
IUCN to complete the revision and make it available as soon as
possible.

( ) The Meeting noted that Protocol Annex V will prohibit entry 
into Antarctic Specially Protected Areas except in accordance with 
a permit issued under Article 7 of the Annex. The Meeting urged 
Parties that have not already done so to institute a permit system 
to begin to give effect to the permitting provisions.

( ) With respect to the preceding point, the Meeting recognized 
that effective implemention of Annex V will require, where 
appropriate, that ASPAs and ASMAs are marked and posted with 
signs, and that all persons visiting Antarctica are aware of the 
locations of ASPAs and ASMAs, and the prohibitions or restrictions 
on entry and activities that can be conducted in these Areas. 
Towards this end, the Meeting urged that all Parties take such 
steps as possible to begin to give effect to Article 9 of Annex 5. 
The Meeting also urged that the need to make such information 
available be considered in the development of the Data Information 
System referenced in paragraphs ---- to ---- of this Report.

( ) The Meeting noted that ASPAs, ASMAs, and historic sites and 
monuments may need to be visited periodically to ensure that the 
objectives of their management plans are being met. The Meeting 
further noted that a suggested list of information that should be 
collected and included in reports of site visits was developed at, 
and was appended to the Report, of ATCM XIV. The Meeting agreed 
that Parties, through their national committees, would ask SCAR to 
review this list and provide advice on (i) how it should be 
revised to reflect the provisions of the Protocol, (ii) how site 
visits should be carried out, and (iii) how the results of such 
visits should be reported to be most useful in implementing the 
Protocol.

( ) Attention was called to the fact that, under Annex V of the 
Protocol, it would be appropriate in some cases to adopt 
management plans specifying conditions for visiting and activities 
that can be carried out in the vicinity of historic sites and 
monuments. Attention also was drawn to the fact that a number of 
abandoned work sites may have scientific and historic values and 
that program operators should consider such possibilities before 
initiating clean-up operations to give effect to Article 1 (5) of 
Protocol Annex III.

Item 12 
International Antarctic Scientific and Logistic Cooperation

( ) The Delegation of Japan (XVII ATCM/INFO 37) and Finland ( 
XVII ATCM/INFO 44) submitted information papers on co-operation.

( ) Many delegations reported on scientific and logistic co-
operation with other Parties, thus emphasizing the concrete 
results obtained and the need to continue this cooperation within 
the Antarctic Treaty System. Of particular interest was New 
Zealand announcement of and paper on the opening of the 
International Antarctic Center in Christchurch.
the combustion of fossil fuels and incineration of waste do not contaminate the Antarctic atmosphere, terrestial, ice aquatic or marine environments in a way that would compromise their scientific values;

2. Ask their COMNAP representatives in consultation with SCAR to establish research programs at a representative subset of facilities in Antarctica to determine how different types and sizes of facilities in different localities (eg. coastal and inland stations on rocks and on ice shelves) affect the Antarctic environment;

3. Provide a list of the Antarctic data sets being compiled and archived by their nationals and make this list available to other Parties, SCAR and COMNAP, as soon as possible, to form the basis for the development of an Antarctic Data Directory; and

4. Establish as appropriate, national arrangements for obtaining expert advice on the types of data products and data access mechanisms which would best meet both the basic scientific requirements and long-term environmental monitoring requirements.
RECOMMENDATION

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS
REVISED DESCRIPTIONS AND PROPOSED MANAGEMENT PLANS
FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREAS

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendation XV-8 and XV-9

Noting that revised Area Descriptions and proposed Management
Plans have been approved by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic
Research (SCAR);

Noting also that the format of these revised Area Descriptions and
proposed Management Plans accord with Article 5 of Annex V of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
adopted under Recommendation XVI-10;

Recommend t? their Governments that for the Specially Protected
Areas liste. below:

    (i) the Descriptions inserted in Annex B, Specially
Protected Areas, of the Agreed Measures for the
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora be deleted;

    (ii) the Descriptions and Management Plans of Specially
Protected Areas, annexed to this Recommendation, be
inserted in Annex B, Specially Protected Areas, of the
Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna
and Flora.

The Specially Protected Areas involved are:

Area No. 1    Taylor Rookery, Mac Robertson Land;
Area No. 2    Rookery Islands, Holme Bay, Mac Robertson Land;

Area No. 3    Ardery Island and Odbert Island, Budd Coast;
Area No. 20   'New College Valley', Caughley Beach, Cape
              Bird, Ross Island.
MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO. 1
TAYLOR ROOKERY, MAC. ROBERTSON LAND

1.  DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

The area was originally designated a Specially Protected Area because it 
contains a colony of emperor penguins (Aptenodytes forsteri) which is one 
of the few, and probably the largest, of the known colonies of this species 
located wholly on land. Almost all other emperor penguin rookeries are 
located on sea ice. The rookery is also important because of long-term 
monitoring of the population of the penguins (since 1954). The colony is 
ideal for counting since it is surrounded by small rocky hills which make it 
possible to observe every bird without entering the breeding area. A 
photographic census program has been carried out annually since 1988, and 
it is believed that this method has resulted in almost complete accuracy of 
counting.

2.  AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
  •  prevent unnecessary disturbance to the emperor penguin colony at 
     Taylor Rookery; and
  •  permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be 
     undertaken elsewhere, while ensuring no significant disturbance to 
     the ecosystem of the area including the penguin colony.

3.  MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The management plan and activities in the Area should be kept under 
review to ensure that the values for which the Area was designated are 
being fully protected. Inspection visits may be made only when considered 
essential for management purposes.

4.  PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-1 in November 1966, for an 
indefinite period.

5.  DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a)  Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

The area consists of the whole of the northernmost rock exposure on 
the east side of Taylor Glacier, Mac. Robertson Land (67°26'S; 60°50'E). 
The rookery is located on a low lying rock outcrop in the south-west 
corner of a bay formed by Taylor Glacier to the west, the polar ice cap to 
the south and the islands of the Colbeck Archipelago to the east. The 
Area is surrounded by sea ice to the north and east. The area is some 90 
kilometres west of Mawson station. There is ice-free terrain adjacent to 
the glacier on the western boundary and to the south the rock rises
2

steeply to meet the ice of the plateau. The rock itself forms a horseshoe 
around a central flat area of exposed rock and moraine. This area is 
covered with snow in winter and is occupied by the emperor penguins. 
The compressed snow melts in summer to form a shallow lake and 
stream which exits to the north-east. The sides of the horseshoe are 
rounded ridges of rock which are bare and smoothed by ice. Otherwise 
he terrain is rough and dissected with cracks and fissures. The average 
height of the ridges is about 30 metres. The area also has a raised beach 
which is typical of several found along the coast of Mac. Robertson 
Land. The beach is composed of locally derived pebbles, cobbles and 
boulders between 1 cm and 1 m across. It slopes upwards from the 
shoreline to a well defined platform several metres broad and 3 to 6 m 
above sea level.

There are no boundary markers since the Area is easily defined by its 
natural features.

(b) Access to the Area:

Access to the Area is only in accordance with a permit or authority 
issued by a contracting party or its authorised representative.

Restrictions apply to the mode of transport to and within the Area, and 
access points are prescribed; see Section 8(a).

(c) Location of structures including scientific stations, research and refuge 
facilities both within and near the Area:

There are no structures within the Area and no permanent structures 
are permitted. A four-berth refuge is located in the Colbeck 
Archipelago, approximately 5 kilometres to the north-east of the area 
(see Map B). Mawson Station (67°36'S, 62°53'E°) is approximately 90 
kilometres to the east.

(d) Location of other protected areas in or near the Area:

The Rookery Islands (Specially Protected Area No. 2) are located some 
80 kilometres to the east of Taylor Rookery (see Map A).

6. IDENTIFICATION OF RESTRICTED ZONES

Access to the Emperor penguin colony, marked on Map C, is prohibited 
unless authorised in a permit.

7. MAPS OF THE AREA

Map A shows the location of the Area in relation to the Mawson region; 
Map B shows the location of the field hut on the Colbeck Archipelago, and 
access routes to the Area; and Map C shows the Area in greater detail, 
including the usual location of the penguin colony, and the area where all 
activity such as landing helicopters and installing field huts or field camps 
should take place, where permitted.
3.

8.  CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED

Criteria for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
-   it is issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be undertaken elsewhere;
-   the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system existing in the Area; and
-   the actions permitted are in accordance with the Management Plan for the Area.

Conditions applying:

(a)     Access to and movement within the Area:

i.  Wherever possible, access should be from the sea ice to the east of Colbeck Archipelago, to avoid disturbance to the birds by crossing their pathways from the rookery to the sea (see Map B). Persons in the vicinity, not approaching the colony, should also be aware of the penguins' pathways, and take care to cause as little disturbance to them as possible.

ii. Travel to the Area may be by oversnow vehicle, which is generally only possible during the period 1 May to 25 December, or by helicopter. Vehicle entry to the Area is prohibited. Oversnow vehicles used for transport to the Area are to be left outside the Area, to the east, and entry must be by foot. The approach route for vehicles is marked on Map B.

iii.    Helicopters are not permitted to land in the Area unless sea ice conditions outside the Area are such that it would be hazardous for aircraft to land on ice or for personnel to walk on it. If sea ice conditions are not suitable, helicopters are authorised to land in the Area, to the north-east at the point marked "H", where a headland to the south obscures the colony from view (see Map C). Map B shows the helicopter access route.

iv. The following conditions apply to the use of helicopters:
-   helicopters are to approach the Area from the east over the sea ice and, where sea ice conditions permit, land outside the Area, with access being by foot (see Map B);
-   overflight of the rookery is prohibited;
-   when landing outside the Area, helicopters should not land, take off or fly within 500 metres of the rookery;
-   if landing inside the Area is essential due to sea ice conditions, helicopters should land in the north-east of the Area at the point marked "H", where a headland to the south obscures the colony from view (see Map C);
-   helicopters approaching to land in the Area must fly as low as possible over the sea ice to avoid disturbing the colony; and
-   helicopters are not to be refuelled within the Area.
v. 	There are no marked pedestrian routes within the Area; 
	pedestrians should keep well away from the penguins, unless 
	disturbance to the penguins is authorised by permit. Movement 
	in and around the Area should be such that, in general, the routes 
	used by the birds are not crossed.

vi.	Dogs are not to be used for transport to the Area.

(b)	Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including 
	restrictions on time and place:

	i.	The penguins are particularly sensitive to disturbance during the 
	following periods:
	•	when they are incubating eggs, from mid-May to mid-July; 
	and
	•	from mid-July, when feeding chicks to mid-December, when 
	the chicks fledge. However, penguins are known to be 
	present at the rookery during every month except February, 
	when no recorded expeditions to the rookery have been 
	made; restrictions therefore apply year-round.

	ii.	The emperor penguin colony is ideal for counting. Normally the 
	best vantage point for viewing and photographing the penguins is 
	a rocky headland which runs adjacent to Taylor Glacier, on the 
	western side of the rookery. The ideal time for a census is from 22 
	June to 5 July, since during this time only incubating males are 
	present, each representing one breeding pair. An ongoing 
	photographic census program has been carried out since 1988.

	iii.	Other activities which may be conducted in the Area:
	•	compelling scientific research which cannot be undertaken 
	elsewhere and which will not jeopardise the ecosystem of the 
	Area; and
	•	compelling management activities, which if not carried out 
	would jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.

(c)	The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

	No structures are to be installed in the Area unless essential for 
	scientific purposes; any structure installed should be removed when it 
	is no longer required. Only the minimum number of personnel 
	necessary to install and to remove the structure should be used. 
	Temporary field huts if permitted, should be placed well away from the 
	penguin colony at the point marked "X", to the north-east of the Area, 
	where a headland to the south obscures the colony from view (see Map 
	C).

(d)	The location of field camps:

	See (c) above.
5

(e) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into 
the Area:

    i.   No poultry products, including dried food containing egg powder, 
         are to be taken into the Area.

    ii.  No depots of food or other supplies are to be left within the Area 
         beyond the season for which they are required.

   iii.  Fuel is not to be depoted in the Area, unless required by a visitor 
         for personal use, ie for cooking/heating in a field hut, and is to be 
         removed when no longer required.

(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

         Taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna is 
         prohibited unless specifically authorised by permit issued in accordance 
         with the Agreed Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and 
         Flora, or Article 3 of Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental 
         Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, whichever is appropriate.

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the 
    permit holder:

         There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into 
         the Area by permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for 
         scientific or management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

         No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives 
    of the Management Plan can continue to be met:

    i.   Permits should specify the maximum number of people allowed 
         entry at any one time.

    ii.  Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to 
         achieve the research and management objectives.

   iii.  Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove 
         structures or equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

         Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing 
         authority detailing the activities undertaken within the Area including 
         a summary of research findings, and comments indicating measures 
         taken to ensure compliance with conditions. Where appropriate, the 
         report may make recommendations relevant to the management of 
         the Area, in particular, as to whether the values for which the Area 
         was designated are being adequately protected. The report should be 
         submitted as soon as practicable after the visit to the Area has been 
         completed.
MAP 'B'

0     0.5    1     1.5    2
KILOMETRES
                         67°25'S
                         GILE
main penguin pathways
COLBECK
ARCHIPELAGO
Taylor
Glacier
Taylor Rookery
vehicle
Tschuffert Peak
route
approach
helicopter approach route
Norris I
Colbeck Hut
Byrd Head
Chapman Ridge
Stump Mt
MAP 'C'


                      60°53' E


SEA ICE


                      Emperor penguin pathways to the sea.

                      Site for Apple hut.
                      Headland to the south
                      obscures the colony
                      from view.

                      Helicopter landing site
                      with low altitude entry
                      from the east.


Taylor


Glacier


67°28' S


                      Traditional winter
                      Colony Site


SEA ICE


                      Area of
                      SPA No1


0     50    100   150   200      METRES


-8- Contours in metres
50.1 Spot height in metres
MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO. 2
ROOKERY ISLANDS, HOLME BAY, MAC. ROBERTSON LAND

1. DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

The Rookery Islands contain breeding colonies of six bird species resident in the
Mawson area; Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae), Cape petrel (Daption capensis),
snow petrel (Pagodroma nivea), southern giant petrel (Macronectes giganteus),
Wilson's storm petrel (Oceanites oceanicus) and the Antarctic skua (Catharacta
maccormicki). The southern giant petrel breeds nowhere else in the region. The
designation of the Area aims to safeguard this unusual association of six species and
ensure the preservation of a sample offshore island habitat.

2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
-   maintain a reference area unmodified by human interference;
-   p[?]mit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be undertaken
    elsewhere, while ensuring no significant disturbance to the ecosystem of the Area
    and maintaining the status of the SPA as a reference area; and
-   ensure that the breeding colony of southern giant petrels, which is close to the
    point of local extinction, is not endangered by human impacts.

3. MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The management plan and activities in the Area should be kept under review to
ensure that the values for which the Area was designated are being fully protected.
Inspection visits may be made only when considered essential for management
purposes.

4. PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-1 in November 1966 for an indefinite
period.

5. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

Rookery Islands are a group of small islands and rocks in the south-western part
of Holme Bay, Mac. Robertson Land, approximately 10 kilometres to the west of
the Australian station, Mawson. The Area comprises the islands and rocks lying
within the rectangle marked on the map (see Section 7), the general location of
which is latitude 67°37'S, longitude 62°33'E. There are no boundary markers
delimiting the site.

There are approximately 75 small islands. They range in size from small rocks
which barely remain above water at high tide to the largest members of the group
which are Giganteus Island (approximately 400 m long, 400 m wide and 30 m
high) and Rookery Island which is of similar area but slightly more elongated.
Rookery Island is the highest of the group reaching an altitude of 62m. Raised
beaches are evident on Giganteus Island.
3

for essential scientific purposes only if it can be demonstrated that 
disturbance will be minimal.

iii. No refuelling within the Area.

iv. Overflight of the islands is prohibited except where essential for scientific 
purposes. Such overflight is to be at an altitude of no less than 500 metres.

v. Dogs are not to be used for transport within the Area.

vi. Access to Giganeteus Island is prohibited except for the purpose of 
monitoring the southern giant petrels (Macronectes giganteus) or for 
activities which may be conducted without threat to their population status. 
As the breeding colony is close to the point of local extinction and the birds 
are easily disturbed, the number of persons granted entry for this purpose 
must be strictly limited and include an experienced ornithologist.

(b) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including restrictions 
on time and place:

    i. Compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere.

   ii. Compelling management activities, which if not carried out would 
jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.

(c) The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

No structures, including field huts, are to be installed in the Area unless essential 
for scientific purposes; any structure installed should be removed when no 
longer required. Only the minimum number of personnel necessary to install 
and remove the structure should be used.

(d) The location of field camps:

See (c) above.

(e) Restrictions on material and organisms which may be brought into the Area:

    i. Fuel is not to be depoted in the Area, unless required by a researcher for 
personal use, ie for cooking/heating in a field hut, and is to be removed 
when no longer required.

   ii. No poultry products, including dried food containing egg powder, are to be 
taken into the Area.

  iii. No food or other supplies should be left within the Area beyond the season 
for which they are required.

(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna is prohibited 
unless specifically authorised by permit in accordance with the Agreed Measures 
for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, or Article 3 of Annex II to the 
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, whichever is 
appropriate.
4

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder:

There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for scientific or management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Management Plan can continue to be met:

    i. Permits should specify the maximum numbers of personnel who may enter the Area.

   ii. Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve research and management objectives.

  iii. Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove structures or equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing authority detailing the activities undertaken within the Area including a summary of research findings, and comments indicating measures taken to ensure compliance with conditions. Where appropriate, the report may make recommendations relevant to the management of the Area, in particular, as to whether the values for which the Area was designated are being adequately protected. The report should be submitted as soon as practicable after the visit to the Area has been completed.
MAP 'A'                                       MAP 'B'
  62°30'E                                       62°30'E
0 2 4                                         Wigg Island
KILOMETRES
ROOKERY
ISLANDS
          +                                     
MAWSON    COAST                               67°35'S
                         67°40'S
HOLME & BAY
MAWSON
Giganteus Island
Rookery Island
0       1       2
KILOMETRES
ROOKERY ISLANDS
Specially Protected Area
MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR SPECIALLY PROTECTED AREA (SPA) NO 3
ARDERY ISLAND AND ODBERT ISLAND, BUDD COAST

1.  DESCRIPTION OF VALUES TO BE PROTECTED

Ardery and Odbert Islands support several breeding species of petrel and provide a
sample of their habitat. There is no other readily accessible place in eastern Antarctica
where the four genera of fulmarine petrels (Thalassoica antarctica, Fulmarus
glacialoides, Daption capensis and Pagodroma nivea) breed in the same place in
sufficient numbers to allow comparative study. Study of these four genera at the one
location is of high ecological importance both from the point of view of
understanding and of monitoring the Southern Ocean ecosystem. It is believed that
Ardery Island is unique insofar as it is the only area in the Antarctic which harbours
two different subspecies of snow petrels. Studies on morphological or ecological
differences between these two subspecies are not possible anywhere else. In addition
both islands have breeding populations of Wilson's storm petrels (Oceanites
oceanicus) and Antarctic skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) and Odbert Island supports
breeding populations of Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae).

2.  AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

Management of the Area aims to:
•   prevent unnecessary disturbance to the colonies of petrels on Ardery and Odbert
Islands; and
•   permit research of a compelling scientific nature which cannot be undertaken
elsewhere, while ensuring this has no significant impact on the ecosystem in
that area.

3.  MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Management Plan and activities in the Area should be kept under review to
ensure that the values for which the Area was designated are being fully protected.
Inspection visits may be made only when considered essential for management
purposes.

4.  PERIOD OF DESIGNATION

Designated under ATCM Recommendation IV-3 in November 1966 for an indefinite
period.

5.  DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

(a) Geographical co-ordinates and natural features of the Area:

Ardery Island (66°22'S, 110°28'E) and Odbert Island (66°22'S, 110°33'E) form part
of the Windmill Islands group lying in the east of Vincennes Bay, off the Budd
Coast (see Map A). They are located 5 km and 0.6 km respectively to the west of
Robinson Ridge, south of Casey Station. Odbert Island is approximately 2.5 km
long and 0.5 km wide. It has a rocky coast which rises steeply from the sea to a
plateau. The highest point is 100 m above sea level. The plateau is dissected by a
2

series of valleys which run to the south from the high flat rim on the northern 
side. These valleys are snow-covered in winter. The hill tops remain essentially 
ice and snow free. In some years the island remains joined to Robinson Ridge on 
the mainland by sea ice. Ardery Island is a steep ice free island approximately 
1 km long and 0.5 km wide, with an east-west orientation. The highest point is 
113 m above mean sea level.

The terrain on both islands is rugged and dissected by fissures. The cliffs are 
fractured and have many narrow exposed ledges which in summer are occupied 
by nesting sea birds. On the hillsides and plateau region, the exposed rock is ice-
smoothed and the valley floors are covered with moraine. Both islands have 
several small tarns which are frozen in winter and filled with melt water in 
summer. Many of these are ephemeral and dry out towards the end of summer. 
Others which are located below snow banks, are fed continuously by melt water.

(b) Access to the Area:

Access to the Area may only be in accordance with a permit or authority issued by 
a contracting party or its authorised representative.

Defined landing sites for access by sea and helicopter to Ardery and Odbert Islands 
are shown on Maps B and C respectively. On Ardery Island the preferred boat 
landing site is at Robertson Landing where there are three rock anchors present 
to tie down a boat or other equipment. It should be noted that all three boat 
landing sites marked on Map B are within 200 metres of colonies of birds, 
however they represent the only safe landing sites on the Island and if landings 
are undertaken carefully there is no disturbance to the birds.

There are no defined pedestrian routes within the Area, however pedestrians 
should avoid disturbance of the birds at all times.

(c) Location of structures including scientific stations, research and refuge facilities 
both within and near the Area:

There are no structures within the Area and no permanent structures are 
permitted.

The islands lie approximately 12 kilometres south of Casey Station.

A four-berth refuge hut is located on Robinson's Ridge, 0.5 km from the shore.

(d) Location of other protected areas in or near the Area:

North-East Bailey Peninsula (66°17'S, 110°32'E) (Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No 16) and Clark Peninsula (66°15'S, 110°36'E) (Site of Special Scientific Interest 
No 17) lie opposite the Windmill Islands (see Map A).

6. IDENTIFICATION OF RESTRICTED ZONES

Access to the petrel and Adélie penguin colonies marked on Maps B and C is 
prohibited unless authorised in a permit.
3

7. MAPS OF THE AREA

Three maps of the Area are attached. Map A shows the Area and its location. Map B 
(Ardery Island) and Map C (Odbert Island) show preferred helicopter approaches and 
landing sites, landing sites for access by water and the location of the petrel and Adélie 
breeding colonies.

8. CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH PERMITS MAY BE GRANTED

Criteria for issuing a permit to enter the Area are that:
  • it is issued for a compelling scientific purpose which cannot be undertaken 
    elsewhere;
  • the actions permitted will not jeopardise the natural ecological system existing in 
    the Area; and
  • the actions permitted are in accordance with the management plan for the Area.

Conditions applying:

(a) Access to and movement within the Area:

    i. Travel to the islands should be by foot, oversnow vehicle or boat where 
       possible; oversnow vehicles used to visit the islands must be left at the 
       shoreline and movement within the Area should be by foot.
   ii. If access to the islands is not possible by sea or over sea-ice then helicopters 
       may be used subject to the following conditions:
        • overflight of the islands should be avoided at all times, except where it 
          is considered essential for scientific purposes. In these instances 
          overflight must be at an altitude or horizontal distance of no less than 
          500 metres;
        • during the breeding season of penguins and petrels, defined here as the 
          period from 1 November to 1 April, helicopter movement to the 
          islands should be kept to the minimum;
        • refuelling is not to take place within the Area;
        • only personnel who are required to carry out work in the Area should 
          leave the helicopter;
        • the approach to Ardery Island should be at a high altitude and from a 
          southern direction as the lowest densities of birds are on the southern 
          cliffs (see Map B);
        • the approach to Odbert Island should preferably be from the south, 
          avoiding cliff areas because of the nesting petrels (see Map C).

(b) Activities which are, or may be, conducted within the Area, including 
    restrictions on time and place:

    i. Compelling scientific activities which cannot be conducted elsewhere.
   ii. Compelling management activities, which if not carried out would 
       jeopardise the values for which the Area was designated.
  iii. Where activities necessitate interference with the birds care should be 
       taken to cause the least possible disturbance, particularly during the period 
       1 November to 1 April.
4

(c) The installation, modification, or removal of structures:

No structures may be erected in the Area unless essential for research purposes. 
Any structures installed on the islands must be removed when no longer 
required. Installation of a field hut on Ardery Island should take place wherever 
possible before 1 November when the breeding season commences and removal 
should be after 1 April when the fledglings have departed. Installation and 
removal should be by oversnow transport unless sea-ice conditions prevent this. 
For use of helicopters see (a) ii above.

(d) The location of field camps:

If required for field work a hut may be erected on Ardery Island at the point 
specified on Map B. There are 8 solid rock anchors available at this spot.

(e) Restrictions on materials and organisms which may be brought into the Area:

i.  Fuel is not to be depot[?]ed on the islands, unless required by a researcher for 
    personal use, ie for cooking/heating etc, in a field hut on Ardery Island, and 
    is to be removed at the same time as the hut.

ii. No poultry products, including dried food containing egg powder, are to be 
    taken into the Area.

(f) The taking of or harmful interference with native flora and fauna:

Taking of, or harmful interference with, native flora and fauna is prohibited 
unless specifically authorised by permit issued in accordance with the Agreed 
Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, or Article 3 of 
Annex II to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 
whicheve[?] is appropriate.

(g) The collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by the permit 
holder:

There is to be no collection or removal of anything not brought into the Area by 
the permit holder unless specifically authorised by permit for scientific or 
management purposes.

(h) The disposal of waste:

No wastes, including human wastes, are to be left in the Area.

(i) Measures that may be necessary to ensure that the aims and objectives of the 
Management Plan can continue to be met:

i.  Permits should specify the maximum number of people allowed entry at 
    any one time.

ii. Visits to the Area should be kept to the minimum necessary to achieve the 
    research and management objectives.
5

iii. Access should be permitted where necessary to place or remove structures 
or equipment.

(j) Requirement for reports:

Each permit holder shall submit a report to the permit-issuing authority 
detailing the activities undertaken within the Area including a summary of 
research findings, and comments indicating measures taken to ensure 
compliance with conditions. Where appropriate, the report may make 
recommendations relevant to the management of the Area, in particular, as to 
whether the values for which the Area was designated are being adequately 
protected. The report should be submitted as soon as practicable after the visit to 
the Area has been completed.
MAP 'A'



Lilienthal Island                                                    
                                  110°30'E                           
                      Berkley 
                      island                                      
                                                                      
              Swain Group                                                 
                                                                      
                      SSSI                                                   
                      No 17                                                  
                                                                      
WILKES STATION (CLOSED)                                                  
                      Newcomb Bay                                            
CASEY STATION          Shirley Island                                    
                      SSSI                                                   
WINDMILL               No 16                           Laken              
ISLANDS                                                  Moraines           
                                                                      
                      Beall Island                                           
                                                                      
66°20'S                Hollin Island                                            
                      Midgley Island                                         
                                                                      
                      Warrington                                             
                      Island                                                 
                                                                 0        
                                                                 5        
                      Ardery Island                           10       
WINDMILL                                                    KILOMETRES   
ISLANDS                                                     15       
                      SPA                                                    
                      Odbert Island                                          
                      Robinson Ridge                                         
                                                                      
66°20'S-                                                                  
                           -                                                  
                           -                                                  
                           -                                                  
                           -                                                  
                           -                                                  

                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

MAP 'B'

ARDERY
ISLAND




      0    100   200   300
METRES
(approximate scale only)

LEGEND

1    Recommended landing:
     Robertson Landing

2    Cove Landing

3    Penney Landing

4    Recommended location
     for Apple Hut - 8 rock
     anchors present. The
     northernmost is marked
     by a cairn of stones.

H    Best helicopter landing for
     general purposes, but landing
     anywhere in the flat central
     areas of Ardery Island is
     possible

     3 rock anchors
     (for eg boat)

petrel colonies




Ardery island as seen when approaching from the north.
(Numbers refer to those in map above)
MAP 'C'

preferred direction 
of approach for 
helicopters

ODBERT 
ISLAND

LEGEND

petrel colonies
Adélie rookeries
Prefered helicopter landing site

0   200 400 600
METRES
(approximate scale only)
Specially Protected Area (SPA) No 20
"New College Valley", Caughley Beach, Cape Bird, Ross Island

1. Geographical location

The site is in latitude 77°14'S, longitude 166°23'E, in the northern part of the Cape Bird
ice-free area. It lies between Northern Rookery and Middle Rookery and is about 250 m
south of the summer research station.

2. Management plan

(i) Description of area

Topography

The area consists of the generally west-facing ice-free slopes lying between the cliff top
above Caughley Beach and a line parallel to and about 100 m east of the edge of the Mount
Bird Ice Cap, and between a line south of the main stream bed of "Keble Valley" and the
south ridge of "New College Valley". It is surrounded to the north, south and east by Site
of Special Scientific Interest No 10 and to the west terminates at the cliff tops above
Caughley Beach. Its total area is about 10 ha.

The ground is largely covered by stones and boulders of volcanic origin which have been
reworked by glacial action. There are a few glacial erratic boulders of different origin.

The major feature of the site is "New College Valley" which has been cut by the vigorous
flows of meltwater received from the Mount Bird Ice Cap during summer. Tributaries to
this stream and two other smaller streams in the area are fed by melt from persistent
summer snowdrifts and have eroded their own shallow gullies and channels.

Biological features

A general descrioption of the vegetation is provided by Broady (1984, 1989) as part of a
broad survey of vegetation at Cape Bird and two other ice-free areas on Ross Island.
Longton (1973, 1974) classified the bryophyte community at Caughley Beach as the
Bryum antarcticum Sociation in which B. antarcticum is dominant with occasional B.
argenteum. It is not clear from the information presented whether the site examined was
actually inside the SPA but, if not, it was certainly very close. Sketch maps of moss and
algae stands within the SPA are provided by Broady (1984).

Stream vegetation includes luxuriant red-brown oscillatoriacean (Cyanobacteria) mats, rich
epilithic green filaments and crusts of chlorophyte algae, and colonies of Nostoc
(Cyanobacteria).

The more or less north west-facing slopes of the main valley and smaller gullies support
extensive moss stands as scattered small cushions and as confluent growths up to several
square metres in extent (total cover >200 m^(2)). Often the plants and surrounding soil
become covered with a white mineral encrustation if meltwater supply ceases during the
summer and vegetation and soils dessicate. The maximum development of moss is found
along the borders of shallow channels taking meltwater from snow drifts. Also scattered
cushions no more than 5 cm diameter are found on moist ground where melt percolations
31
are not channelled but seep broadly over the surface. Bryophyte biomass at Caughley 
Beach (Longton, 1974) was estimated as 14 and 938 g dry weight per square metre for two 
stands, with 1.4% and 84.7% cover respectively.

The mosses are generally associated with abundant red-brown oscillatoriacean mats and 
occasionally with colonies of Nostoc. Other areas of soaked ground are dominated by 
either Nostoc colonies (approximately 100 m^(2)) or oscillatoriacean mats (approximately 200 
m^(2)).

Skuas (Catharacta maccormicki) nest on the beach below the cliffs to the west of the site 
and frequently overfly and land within the SPA. Adélie penguins (Pygoscelis adeliae) from 
large nearby rookeries occasionally traverse the area. Nutrient enrichment of soils occurs 
from deposited guano as well as from windblown particulates from the large penguin 
rookeries to the north and south.

(ii) Reason for designation

The area contains some of the most luxuriant stands on Ross Island of moss and algae 
vegetation and associated microflora and microfauna. Because of the susceptibility of this 
vegetation to damage from trampling, the designation of the area provides protection for its 
biota, so that the area may serve as a conservation reserve representative of the adjacent Site 
of Special Scientific Interest.

(iii) Date of designation and originator

The site was established by ATCM Recommendation XIII-12 following its proposal to 
SCAR by New Zealand in October 1984.

(iv) Access points

The site can be accessed only by passing through the adjacent SSSI. It is best reached by a 
route directly south-east from the summer research station to the north. Care should be 
taken to avoid any areas of vegetation along the way.

(v) Entry permit requirement

Entry to the area is only in strict accordance with a current permit, issued by the 
Participating Government or its authorized representative, specifically for a compelling 
scientific purpose which cannot be served elsewhere or for site inspection (but see 
"Inspection and maintenance" below), and which will not jeopardize any aspect of the 
natural ecosystem or its biota within the area (see Antarctic Treaty Agreed Measures for the 
Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora, Article VIII). Details of the visit should be 
included in the national annual report of Exchange of Information for the same Antarctic 
season in which the activities were carried out.

(vi) Prohibitions

To avoid or minimize human impact it is forbidden to:

(a) drive any vehicle within the Area;
(b) land a helicopter within the Area;
(c) overfly the Area by an aircraft below 250 m above the highest point;
(d) incinerate, bury or otherwise dispose of any non-human and human waste within 
the Area; all such waste must be removed from the Area;
(e) leave depots of fuel, food, or any other supplies within the Area;
(f) erect any form of building within the Area;
(g) use any sampling or other equipment within the Area which has not been sterilized 
using an acceptable method.

32
(vii) Pedestrian routes

Every precaution must be taken to keep clear of visible vegetation and also waterlogged 
ground, whether this has visible vegetation or not. During summer all these areas are 
easily damaged by tram[?]ing. Saturated ground, especially where situated on sloping 
terrain, is very prone to slip when traversed by foot and the making of deep footprints 
would be unavoidable. Routes should be taken which pass upslope of persistent summer 
snow drifts, especially during times of thaw. In this way saturated ground would be most 
easily avoided.

(viii) Scientific research and sampling

All activities must conform strictly with those specified in the permit to enter the Area. 
Only for exceptional purposes would sampling of vegetation be permitted as there are 
similar areas of vegetation in the adjacent SSSI, as well as outside the designated areas to 
the south of the site.

Persons permitted to enter the site should take all reasonable precautions to avoid 
introducing plants and micro-organisms from elsewhere. All sampling apparatus should be 
sterilized before use and boots should be thoroughly cleaned before entry.

(ix) Inspection and maintenance

Inspection visits to the Area should be made once every year to assess the state of the site 
and to monitor any significant biological or environmental changes. However, entry to the 
site is not necessary for these visits as its state can be readily viewed from the surrounding 
SSSI. Also, as the site is small and contains rich terrestrial moss and algal vegetation, on 
site inspection visits could themselves cause damage.

3. Bibliography

BROADY, P A. 1984. The vegetation of Cape Bird, Ross Island, Antarctica. Melbourne 
University Programme in Antarctic Studies, Report No 62, 42 pp, 15 tables, 140 figs.

BROADY, P A. 1989 Broadscale patterns in the distribution of aquatic and terrestrial 
vegetation at three ice-free regions on Ross Island, Antarctica. Hydrobiologia, 172: 77-
95.

LONGTON, R E. 1973. A classification of terrestrial vegetation near McMurdo Sound, 
continental Antarctica. Canadian Journal of Botany, 51: 2339-46.

LONGTON, R E. 1974. Microclimate and biomass in communities of the Bryum 
association on Ross Island, continental Antarctica. The Bryologist, 77: 109-22.

[Postscript: It is intended to place signs close to the boundaries of this site and to choose 
boundaries which more closely follow natural features. The latter requires a more detailed map 
than presently available. Action on both of these will be taken this coming summer.]
RECOMMENDATION

ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS

NEW HISTORIC SITES AND MONUMENTS

WOODEN PLAQUE AND ROCK CAIRN AT PENGUINS BAY

The Representatives,

Recalling Recommendations I-IX, V-4, VI-14, VII-9, XII-7, XIII-16
and XIV-8

Recommend to their Governments to add the following historic
monument to the "List of Historic Monuments Identified and
Described by the proposing Government or Governments" annexed to
Recommendation VII-9, thereby guaranteeing its full protection and
respect as envisaged by the abovementioned Recommendations.

60.  Wooden plaque and rock cairn located at Penguins Bay,
Southern coast of Seymour Island (Marambio), James Ross
Archipelago (64°16'00" S - 56°39'10" W). This plaque was placed
on 10 November 1903 by the crew of a rescue mission of the
Argentinian Corvette "Uruguay" in the site where they met members
of the Swedish expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjold.

The text of the wooden plaque reads as follows:

10.XI.1903 "Uruguay" (Argentine Navy) in its journey to give
assistance to the Swedish Antarctic expedition.

In January 1990, a rock cairn was erected by Argentina in memory
of this event in the place where the plaque is located.
Recommendation

Global Change Research and International Cooperation in Antarctica

The Representatives,

1. Recalling articles II & III of the Antarctic Treaty and Article 
VI of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty, and Recommendation XV-14 on the promotion of international 
scientific cooperation,

2. Reaffirming the Declaration adopted at the XVIth Consultative 
Meeting on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the entry into 
force of the Antarctic Treaty,

3. Noting the recognition in Agenda 21 of the United Nations 
Conference on the Environment and Development of the importance of 
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean for the study of global change 
processes,

4. Acknowledging the role that intensified coordination of 
national research programmes and increased international 
cooperation should play, such as SCAR's publication on "the role 
of Antarctica in global change",

5. Conscious as well that the development of an implementation plan 
for Antarctic research contribution to the International 
Geosphere - Biosphere Programme represents a significant step to 
be accomplished during the Decade of International Antarctic 
Scientific Cooperation (1991-2000) proclaimed by the XVI ATCM,

Recommend to their Governments that they:

1. Welcome the decision adopted by the Scientific Committee for 
Antarctic Research at XXII SCAR to establish a new group of 
specialists on global change and the Antarctic, in order to 
provide linkages and communications between national programmes, 
SCAR working group and other groups of Specialists in areas of 
relevant Antarctic research.

2. Encourage SCAR to articulate, in close cooperation with COMNAP, 
a management structure to implement a coordinated programme for 
global change research in the Antarctic and to contribute trough 
the development of Regional Research Centres (RRC's) to the IGBP 
System for Analysis, Research and Training (START) and to other 
major regional and international programmes on global change 
research.

3. Support initiatives such as the proposal of the SCAR Working 
Group on Biology and the offer made by Chile to hold a workshop on 
the coordination of biological research on King George Island 
(Isla 25 de Mayo); the Cooperative geoscience of the South 
Shetland Islands (COGS) whose second workshop was sponsored by the 
National Institute of Polar Research of Japan; and similar 
initiatives to coordinate research in glaciology and solar-
terrestrial studies
4. Note with appreciation the completion of SCAR's proposal for 
coordinated Antarctic research (the role of Antarctica in global 
change : part 2 ) to be published late in 1992 and the plan to 
implement a regional programme of global change research in the 
Antarctic, trough:

i . Continue to identify high-priority research needs in process 
studies, monitoring, and modelling;
ii.identifying other needs in the implementation of the programme, 
such as logistics, data management, etc;
iii.organizing workshops and symposia to synthesise and discuss 
research results.

5. That the above mentioned regional programme of Global Change 
research in the Antarctic should be given a high scientific 
priority and supported to the greater extent feasible by 
governments.

6. May consider applying to the Global Environmental Facility 
(GEF) and other acceptable funding mechanisms to support the 
proposed new group of specialists and their work.
