ANTARCTIC TREATY                                  TRATADO ANTÁRTICO
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING                      XVII REUNION CONSULTIVA

TRAITÉ SUR L'ANTARCTIQUE                          ДОГОВОР ОБ АНТАРКТИКЕ
XVIIéme RÉUNION CONSULTATIVE                     XVII КОНСУЛЬТАТИВНОЕ СОВЕЩАНИЕ

                           VENICE
                        11-20 november 1992

XVII ATCM/WP 4
9 November 1992
Original: English

RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE SCAR/IUCN WORKSHOP ON
ANTARCTIC PROTECTED AREAS, 29 June - 2 July 1992
Cambridge, U.K.

Agenda Item 11

(Submitted by the Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research -SCAR)
ANTARCTIC TREATY
XVIIth CONSULTATIVE MEETING
Venice, Italy
11-20 November 1992

SCAR - IUCN
Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas
Cambridge, UK
29 June - 3 July 1992

The Workshop on Antarctic Protected Areas was sponsored jointly by
the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR) and the World
Conservation Union (IUCN). It was the decision of the Workshop that
the Recommendations of the Workshop should be submitted to the
XVIIth Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting as a Working Paper for
consideration by the Parties. These Recommendations have been
approved by the President of SCAR and the Director-General of IUCN,
both of whom attended the Workshop but, they are not SCAR
Recommendations and they are not IUCN Recommendations.

The Antarctic Protected Area system
Agenda Item 11
[Submitted by the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR)]
Recommendations of the SCAR/IUCN Workshop on Antarctic Protected 
Areas, convened in Cambridge, U.K., 29 June - 2 July 1992

The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty commits the Treaty Parties to the comprehensive protection 
of the Antarctic environment and dependent and associated 
ecosystems, and it designates Antarctica as a natural reserve 
devoted to peace and science.  Annex V of the Protocol specifies 
the objectives and provides the measures for area protection and 
management and is the legal basis for major reform and 
development of the existing system of protected and managed areas 
in the Antarctic.  The Protocol thus establishes both a new 
opportunity and a new need to review the extent, location, 
rationale and management regime of Antarctic protected areas. 
It is now important that the Protocol be carried forward to 
speedy and effective implementation.

SCAR and the World Conservation Union (IUCN), as the world's 
leading non-governmental bodies experienced in Antarctic science 
and conservation, joined forces to discuss the new provisions for 
special area protection and management under the Protocol and to 
offer advice to the Treaty Parties on their implementation. 
Accordingly, a Workshop was convened with experts from both 
organisations, and representatives of some Treaty national 
authorities.  The agenda of the Workshop was not exhaustive and 
there are plans to continue this work in the future.  Full 
proceedings of the meeting will be published in due course.  The 
principal conclusions of the Workshop, in the form of 
recommendations and explanatory commentary, are set out below.

These are commended to the Parties for their consideration and 
adoption, as is deemed appropriate.

Recommendation 1
That the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties are urged to 
ratify the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic 
Treaty, including its Annexes, as a matter of priority.

Recommendation 2
That in the period prior to ratification of the Protocol the 
Treaty Parties should, as soon as possible, agree the rules of 
procedure of the Committee for Environmental Protection, and 
within these terms give due weight to the importance of the work 
towards development of the Protected Areas System.

Annex V of the Protocol marks a revolutionary change in approach 
to establishment and management of areas for special protection 
and management in the Antarctic.  Previous designation of 
protected areas has been sporadic, piecemeal and often unco-
ordinated, sometimes without any clearly specified underlying 
rationale.  The resulting complicated set of protected area 
categories has caused some confusion and inconsistency in 
developing standards of management and incomplete implementation 
of protected area provisions.

1
The new Annex overcomes most major deficiencies.  It provides, 
for the first time, rules and guidelines for comprehensive and 
systematic development of an Antarctic protected areas system 
consistent with principles and practices that have proven 
successful elsewhere in the world.  Among its innovative features 
are provision for two categories of area, allowing strict 
protection and multiple-use management; criteria for establishing 
a geographically extensive and ecologically representative series 
of areas to protect the widest possible range of natural and 
human conservation values; mandatory and uniform designation 
procedures; and requirements for universal application of a 
management planning process.

The work of the Committee for Environmental Protection together 
with advice from SCAR is crucial to successful establishment and 
management of the protected areas system.  The Committee is 
responsible for receiving proposed management plans for areas, 
taking advice on these plans, and conveying its advice to the 
Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meetings for approval, or 
otherwise, of plans.  The Committee provides the forum for 
consideration of protected area requirements among all Parties, 
together with the best available scientific and technical advice 
from within and outside the Antarctic Treaty System.  This gives 
opportunity for development of areas in a well-structured, 
professional and cohesive manner, while promoting integration of 
protected area objectives with those of other activities in the 
Antarctic.  The functions of the Committee, set out in Article 
12 of the Protocol, clearly recognize the responsibilities and 
tasks involved not only in designation of areas but also in their 
on-going management.

Recommendation 3
That, recalling ATCM Rec. VII-2 and Annex V, Article 3.2 which 
call for identification of protected areas, and the IUCN Strategy 
for Antarctic Conservation which recognises the importance of 
protecting distinctive or special landscapes and historic 
features, Treaty Parties should encourage proposals for new 
protected and managed areas, together with appropriate historic 
sites and monuments, in order to achieve an adequate geographical 
distribution and comprehensive environmental representation of 
such sites within the Antarctic.

Recommendation 4
That although the Protocol is not yet ratified, SCAR should 
continue to receive and evaluate proposals in the form of 
management plans for ASPAs and ASMAs as required under Annex V, 
and then advise the ATCMs directly or through the Committee for 
Environmental Protection (once it is established) of the results 
of its evaluations.

Recommendation 5
That proposals for areas for special protection or management 
should not be rejected because insufficient information is 
available, provided that adequate detail is included to place the 
proposed site within the SCAR ecosystem classification matrix and 
to establish the basis of a management plan.

2
Recommendation 6
That SCAR utilises the revised (at this Workshop) 1977 SCAR 
ecosystem classification system as the systematic environmental-
geographical framework (identified in Annex V, Article 3.2 of the 
Protocol) to evaluate ASPA and ASMA proposals until such time as 
an improved and internationally agreed Antarctic ecosystem 
classification system is adopted by the ATCM. This system should 
be developed in collaboration with IUCN to provide a more 
comprehensive selection of criteria for assessments, including 
those features such as wilderness and aesthetic values, which are 
recognised to be of international importance.

Achieving representation of the full range of environmental 
diversity within protected areas is now a widely recognised goal 
in developing national systems of protected areas. The Treaty 
Parties have also accepted this long-term objective in developing 
the Antarctic protected areas network by providing, in Article 
3.2 of protocol Annex V, a requirement that the Parties seek to 
identify within a systematic environmental-geographical framework 
and to include in the series of ASPAs, inter alia, representative 
examples of major terrestrial and marine ecosystems.

        The existing network of protected areas in the Antarctic is both 
uneven  in geographical distribution and incompletely 
representative of major terrestrial, freshwater and marine 
ecosystems. Overwhelming attention is given to protection of 
biologically exceptional or scientifically significant sites in 
coastal areas, especially to seabird and seal breeding localities 
and vegetated sites.  Major gaps occur in according special 
protection to continental inland sites, particularly aquatic 
ecosystems; geological features, landforms and glaciological 
formations; and to marine areas. Also insufficient attention has 
been given to protecting examples of regional landscapes and 
ecosystems which have scenic and aesthetic values of importance 
to tourism and wilderness recreation activities.

        Achieving a fully representative protected areas system has been 
hindered by the absence of a completely adequate biogeographical 
framework for selecting sites that merit special protection. The 
1977 SCAR habitat classification system, though a useful 
yardstick with which to characterise and compare differing areas, 
is incomplete in its ecological scope and lacks a geographical 
framework.

        Revision of this classification was begun at the Workshop, 
particularly to include consideration of invertebrate fauna and 
to expand or revise reference to physical features such as 
altitude, oceanicity, geothermal phenomena and ice formations. 
Consideration was also given to adopting major ice catchments as 
a first-order geographical reference point. It was agreed that 
SCAR should further refine the classification in collaboration 
with IUCN, in order to take advantage of global experience in 
planning protected areas systems and to ensure that, in selecting 
potential ASPAs, full account is taken of requirements for future 
management and use.

3
A comprehensive, scientifically-based approach to selection of further protected areas should be agreed and promoted by the Parties, through the Committee for Environmental Protection, as soon as possible. The appropriate national authorities should be encouraged to prepare and submit proposed management plans for new sites. These plans would then be initially referred to SCAR for advice and comment, including evaluation of their contribution to diversification of the environmental scope and the management objectives of an expanded Antarctic protected areas system.

Recommendation 7
That SCAR and IUCN (a)continue to collaborate to provide advice on the scientific and technical requirements for protected areas management planning and design, (b)promote further research required to enhance the long-term special protection of biota, habitats, ecosystems, landscapes and other relevant features, and (c)provide wide distribution of a SCAR handbook on the preparation of management plans to assist in ensuring a standard approach, giving particular attention to mapping requirements.

Recommendation 8
That in planning and establishing protected areas, (a)boundaries should be defined by natural features where appropriate, (b)their position should be fixed by Global Positioning system (GPS) techniques where possible, and (c)clearly visible and erected and maintained, as appropriate, by the ATCPs or their delegated authorities.

Recommendation 9
That management plans clearly identify the values to be protected and the management objectives and practices to be observed, recognising that procedures must be practical to apply and are applied consistently among Treaty Parties. The support of COMNAP in achieving these objectives should be sought.

Recommendation 10
That when, in accordance with Article 3.3 of Annex V, existing Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Specially Protected Areas (SPA) are reclassified and renumbered, new management plans should also be prepared to conform with Article 5 of Annex V.

Management planning is essential to successful attainment of protected area goals. Without adequate management plans there is a greater risk that protected areas will be inappropriately designed in terms of their size, shape, coverage and boundary delimitation. Inadequate planning may also lead to incomplete formulation of policies and objectives, inconsistent application of management provisions, unsuccessful resolution of conflicts and ultimately lack of achievement of management objectives. Not only is the management planning process a vital guide for management decision-making, it can also serve a number of consultative and educational purposes.

4
To date, management planning for Antarctic protected areas has 
been developed only to a rudimentary stage. Where plans exist 
they are generally very brief documents, which provide 
insufficient guidance for effective management.

Provisions in Articles 5 and 6 of Annex V of the Protocol, for 
mandatory and universal application of management planning to 
ASPAs and ASMAs, lay the foundation for markedly improved 
protected area planning in the Antarctic. Approved management 
plans will be required before new protected v designated, and the Annex also contains a detailed checklist of 
matters to be addressed in proposed plans. Of particular 
significance are requirements for:

*   clearly stated protection values and management 
    objectives;
*   comprehensive site descriptions and maps, including 
    identification of any internal zoning allowing 
    diversified management; and
*   full specification of conditions relating to the 
    granting of permits for access to and use of Areas.

To comply fully with this demanding set of provisions for 
management planning Parties will require considerable scientific 
and technical support and guidance. SCAR and IUCN can provide 
these, particularly through production of a handbook to guide the 
preparation and review of management plans. This will ensure 
that plans are developed uniformly and to the highest 
professional standards.

Recommendation 11
That to achieve consistency in management Treaty Parties, when 
preparing management plans, are urged to establish a standard 
methodology for site surveillance and monitoring, as well as a 
co-operative management policy in those areas where more than one 
Treaty Party is operating and/or where different values requiring 
protection exist.

Recommendation 12
That the issue of a permit for entry to a protected area should 
require compliance with the management plan for that area, and 
permits should be subject to review and renewable where 
appropriate.

Recommendation 13
That the Treaty Consultative Parties conduct inspection visits 
to ASPAs and ASMAs at not more than five-year intervals to ensure 
that their use is in accordance with their management plans. In 
planning and conducting inspections, Treaty Parties should co-
ordinate their efforts and avoid unnecessary duplication.

Active supervision and management of protected areas in 
Antarctica are time-consuming and expensive operations, which 
present a considerable burden for national authorities. However, 
site surveillance and monitoring, in particular, are crucial for 
ensuring that the provisions of management plans are being met.

5
Providing a warden service - a common practice among protected 
area authorities elsewhere - is at present impractical and except 
in very few instances, unnecessary in Antarctica. This absence 
of on-site supervision, however, accentuates the need for strict 
enforcement of permit procedures to control uses of Areas, and 
adverse impacts on them. At present the national systems for 
granting permits for entry into and use of protected areas vary, 
and few allow timely consideration of applications and the issue 
of permits. All permits should be consistent with management 
plans, and therefore such plans must give clear guidance on what 
are acceptable activities and how and when they should be 
conducted.  This will allow appropriate conditions to be 
specified.

Annex V of the Protocol provides the necessary rules governing 
the issue of permits. But ensuring full compliance will require 
monitoring and regular inspection. To date, inspections under 
the Treaty have been infrequent and sporadic, and have generally 
not included visits to protected areas. More recent inspections, 
some of which have included specific reporting on protected 
areas, have already proved valuable for identifying management 
problems, such as inaccurate plotting of the location of Areas, 
inadequate marking of boundaries, littering of sites and other 
impacts and inappropriate uses, and observations on the adequacy 
of sites with respect to management objectives.

Provisions in the Protocol for inspection and reporting on site 
visits will greatly improve this situation. Effort is required, 
however, to introduce standard approaches to site surveillance, 
monitoring and reporting, to ensure uniform application of use 
provisions and to facilitate exchanges of information and 
experience.

Co-operative and well co-ordinated effort is also required to 
integrate management where two or more national authorities are 
undertaking protected area activities in close geographical 
proximity. Co-ordinated planning and conducting of inspections, 
for example, would reduce costs and avoid duplication. Even more 
important is the need to integrate protected area management with 
other legitimate but potentially conflicting activities, such as 
research and associated logistics operations, fishing and tourist 
activities.  The ASMA concept, which is intended to allow 
integrated land use practices to be applied while avoiding 
adverse or cumulative impacts, holds the key to solving this 
problem. Consultative planning and management mechanisms will 
be needed if the concept is to achieve its full potential.

Recommendation 14  
That the Treaty Consultative Parties implement appropriate 
protection measures for Historic Sites and Monuments through 
provisions under the Protocol, including the use of ASPA and ASMA 
designations and the listing of Sites and Monuments, as 
appropriate.

6
Recommendation 15
That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to enjoin their
operators to consider the historic and scientific value of each
abandoned work site before sanctioning its clean-up.

Comprehensive protected areas systems should give attention, in
appropriate balance, to the conservation both of natural and
cultural values. The Antarctic Treaty provides adequate measures
for protecting historic resources and values, but historic site
establishment and management have tended to be ad hoc and
inadequately integrated within the overall protected areas
system.

Annex V of the Protocol, which allows ASPA and ASMA provisions
to be applied in the case of historic resource protection, will
promote the required integrated management. Application of the
extensive protection mechanisms in Annex V will also provide for
much improved management of historic sites and artefacts, and it
gives opportunity for overcoming existing deficiencies.  For
example, it will now be possible to extend protection to areas
of historic significance, not simply to structures as at present.
Area protection, in turn, will allow for buffering of historic
structures, thereby enhancing retention of their physical and
aesthetic integrity.

Among the further needs for protecting historic resources and
values identified by the Workshop, and which could benefit from
the appropriate professional advice and support, are improved
definitions for historic resources; comprehensive surveys,
inventory, documentation and archiving, preferably employing
standardised methods; and greater use of voluntary, commercial
and charitable support in restoration and management, under
specialist guidance, especially to reduce the considerable costs
involved, which might otherwise detract from scientific research
resources.

Recommendation 16
That, in the absence of specific reference to management of
tourism in the Protocol, the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged
to give consideration to establishing the conservation principles
for assessment and management of all tourist operations, and
should give due weight to the opportunities and constraints for
tourism deriving from protected areas management.

Recommendation 17
That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to encourage and
support research into and monitoring of tourist activities, in
particular to assess the nature and degree of impacts and to
facilitate improved planning and management of tourism.

Over recent years tourism in Antarctica has grown into a very
substantial commercial enterprise, and it appears likely to
continue to expand and diversify in the future. Experience to
date, based on information from a very limited number of surveys
and impact assessment studies, reveals that environmental impacts
from tourism have generally been benign. However, there has been
7
some disruption of the operation of scientific stations and 
associated research programmes, and there is much potential for 
an increase in the nature and degree of impacts associated with 
an expanded tourist industry in the region. On the other hand, 
there are many benefits to be derived from tourism, such as 
increased awareness of and support for Antarctic conservation and 
science.

Tourism requires careful planning and management according to 
conservation principles. This calls for the preparation of a 
comprehensive tourism management strategy, backed by appropriate 
scientific and technical information. Among matters to be 
considered in the strategy are the ways in which protected areas 
management could support tourist operations, for example by 
identifying areas or zones within protected areas for the 
specific use of tourists. At the same time consideration would 
also be required of the means of avoiding detrimental impacts on 
protected areas, including those areas which protect elements of 
human historical heritage.

Tourism management is a complex matter involving, among others, 
programme planning, licensing of operations and issue of permits, 
supervision, insurance and liability for damage including 
environmental damage, safety and search-and-rescue 
considerations, development and maintenance of facilities, and 
management costs and revenues. Experience from around the world 
demonstrates that protected area management and tourism 
management can be highly complementary in attending to the wide 
range of issues involved.

The Treaty Parties have accepted that the question of tourism 
should be addressed within the context of environmental 
protection. This should include consideration of the ways in 
which lessons from tourism management in protected areas 
elsewhere can be adapted to the Antarctic situation, such that 
tourism and protected area management become mutually supporting 
in the cause of environmental protection. One useful initiative 
would be to encourage ATCPs to ensure that reporting procedures 
relating to tourist and non-governmental expeditions are complied 
with, and that information on tourist activities is more 
frequently exchanged among the Treaty Parties.

Recommendation 18
That the Treaty Consultative Parties give due consideration to 
the establishment and maintenance of a database on Antarctic 
protected areas, to allow access to the latest available 
management plans.

Recommendation 19
That sufficient information should be made readily available to 
all visitors to the Antarctic to ensure their compliance with the 
regulations governing wildlife and protected areas. Such 
information should be clearly written and presented in all four 
Treaty languages.

8
Recommendation 20

That Treaty Parties ensure that expeditions, under the terms of 
Article VII of the Antarctic Treaty, which engage in aircraft, 
ship or other vessel charter shall oblige pilots, captains, 
officers, crew and passengers to comply with Antarctic Treaty 
conservation measures and protected area regulations through 
means of charter and carriage contracts. This obligation is 
particularly relevant to those modes of transport crewed by 
nationals of, or chartered from, non-Party States.

Recommendation 21

That the Committee for Environmental Protection, when constituted 
under the Protocol, should develop an information strategy to 
advise on the collection, storage and evaluation of data 
associated with the management and monitoring of protected areas.

Management of Antarctic protected areas currently lacks the 
support of a dedicated information management system for 
recording, storing and retrieving management related information 
from research and monitoring of areas, or for use in education, 
training and publicity programmes - all of which are 
fundamentally important given the steadily increasing pace of 
activity and interest in the region. Instead, information must 
be sifted from scientific papers, inspection reports and Treaty 
documents, many of which are not readily available.

The Protocol imposes very considerable requirements for 
acquisition and exchange of information on protected areas. 
Parties are required to prepare and submit proposed management 
plans as part of the designation process and a record of all 
approved plans is to be maintained in the Depository and 
circulated to all Parties. The Parties are also required to make 
available information (including maps) on the location of 
protected areas and historic sites and monuments, and management 
plans, including lists of relevant prohibitions. There is also 
a requirement that the Parties maintain and exchange information 
on permits issued; reports of visits, including inspections; 
significant change or damage to sites; research in sites; and 
actions taken.

Such information is not required simply to satisfy Protocol 
requirements. It is also essential for a large number of other 
users and for a wide range of purposes, including research, 
environmental monitoring, Environmental Impact Assessment, the 
preparation of information and education resources for tourists 
and other visitors, and general information for the public, to 
increase awareness and encourage support for Antarctic 
conservation. Attention is required to the format and means by 
which such information is conveyed to the respective users.

There is an urgent need for development of a comprehensive 
information management strategy for Antarctic protected areas. 
This should, in particular, spell out clearly the information 
management procedures, which identify who does what and when. 
The strategy should also provide advice on the design and use of 
standard formats for this information, to ensure completeness and
                                                               9
facilitate comparison, evaluation and analysis. Development of 
the strategy could be modelled on the recent SCAR/COMNAP 
discussion document on environmental monitoring. Input to 
strategy development should come from SCAR, COMNAP, IUCN, 
national Antarctic authorities and agencies, and other 
independent Antarctic institutions with data management roles. 
The World Conservation Monitoring Centre, in Cambridge, U.K., or 
a similarly experienced institution, could be asked to assist in 
co-ordinating preparation of the strategy.

Recommendation 22
That the Treaty Consultative Parties be urged to consider, and 
to discuss with the relevant international agencies, the 
opportunities for applying international protected area 
designations to areas of exceptional and universal conservation 
value in Antarctica, and in particular to explore the possibility 
of designating Antarctic Heritage Landscapes, analogous to World 
Heritage Sites under the World Heritage Convention.

Global experience demonstrates that international designation of 
protected areas has been a beneficial means of drawing world 
attention to them, strengthening their protection, and providing 
them with access to worldwide networks of management support, 
including information and financial resources.

Important among the international Conventions for designating and 
listing sites of outstanding international significance, and the 
one most relevant to Antarctica, is the World Heritage Convention 
(strictly the Convention concerning the Protection of the World 
Cultural and Natural Heritage). World Heritage Sites - both 
natural landscapes and cultural monuments - are nominated by 
States but are subject to supra-national approval by a Standing 
Committee of the Parties to the Convention (the World Heritage 
Committee) which takes appropriate professional advice. Primary 
responsibility for maintaining and managing Sites remains with 
the national authorities concerned. Listing under the Convention 
does not generally exclude scientific research or tourist uses 
of Sites.

Unquestionably, as the IUCN Strategy for Antarctic Conservation 
points out, there are natural sites in Antarctica which are of 
outstanding universal value in terms of their scientific, 
landscape and wilderness qualities, and which would qualify for 
consideration as World Heritage Sites. Given the unique legal 
accommodation about national sovereignty under the Antarctic 
Treaty, however, it must be presumed that the World Heritage 
Convention in its present form cannot be applied directly to 
Antarctica.

An alternative option would be to evolve parallel machinery for 
designation of sites within the Treaty Area, using comparable 
criteria and procedures, and applying a title such as Antarctic 
Heritage Landscape which made that comparability widely evident. 
Analogous procedures could also be considered for designation of 
sites that may qualify under related international protected area 
instruments, such as the Ramsar Convention, or the Biosphere
10
Reserve concept of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme.

International protected area designation for appropriate parts of Antarctica, on a basis of and using terms akin to those adopted for other places in the world of outstanding conservation value, would assist the process of harmonising Antarctic protection with the global protected areas movement, while strengthening the already substantial protection measures under the Protocol.  The opportunities available and the legal questions involved should be discussed between the Treaty Parties and the respective international agencies concerned.

 
          

 
11
